Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents under

their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, March 2017

Advance  release  of  table  1  of  the  Summary  of  Economic  Projections  to  be  released  with  the  FOMC  minutes

Percent

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Projections of change  in real gross domestic  product  (GDP)  and  projections  for both measures  of inflation are percent changes  from the fourth  quarter  of  the  previous  year  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  the  year  indicated. PCE  inflation  and  core  PCE  inflation  are  the  percentage  rates  of  change in, respectively,  the  price  index  for personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE)  and  the  price  index  for  PCE  excluding  food  and  energy. Projections  for the unemployment  rate  are  for  the  average  civilian  unemployment  rate  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  the  year  indicated. Each  participant's  projections  are based  on  his  or  her  assessment  of  appropriate  monetary  policy. Longer-run  projections  represent  each  participant's  assessment  of  the  rate  to  which  each variable  would  be  expected  to  converge  under  appropriate  monetary  policy  and  in  the  absence  of  further  shocks  to  the  economy. The  projections  for  the federal  funds  rate  are  the  value  of  the  midpoint  of  the  projected  appropriate  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  or  the  projected  appropriate  target level  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  the  end  of  the  specified  calendar  year  or  over  the  longer  run. The  December  projections  were  made  in  conjunction  with the  meeting  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  on  December  13-14,  2016. One  participant  did  not  submit  longer-run  projections  for  the  change  in real  GDP,  the  unemployment  rate,  or  the  federal  funds  rate  in  conjunction  with  the  December  13-14,  2016,  meeting,  and  one  participant  did  not  submit such  projections  in  conjunction  with  the  March  14-15,  2017,  meeting.

- 1. For  each  period,  the  median  is  the  middle  projection  when  the  projections  are  arranged  from  lowest  to  highest. When  the  number  of  projections is even,  the  median  is  the  average  of  the  two  middle  projections.
- 2. The  central  tendency  excludes  the  three  highest  and  three  lowest  projections  for  each  variable  in  each  year.
- 3. The  range  for  a  variable  in  a  given  year  includes  all  participants'  projections,  from  lowest  to  highest,  for  that  variable  in  that  year.
- 4. Longer-run  projections  for  core  PCE  inflation  are  not  collected.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to the projections table. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

Figure  2. FOMC  participants'  assessments  of  appropriate  monetary  policy: Midpoint  of  target  range  or  target  level  for the  federal  funds  rate

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Economic Projections Charts Explanation of

actual values and projections for three economic variables, based on monetary policy: The charts show FOMC participants' individual assessments of appropriate

- Gross Domestic Product (GDP)-as measured from the fourth the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. · Change in Real quarter of
- Rate-the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth · Unemployment quarter of each year.
- measured by the change in the personal consumption (PCE) price index from the fourth quarter of the previous year to quarter of the year indicated. · PCE Inflation-as expenditures the fourth

these variables is shown for each year from 2012 to 2019, and for the longer Information for run.

solid blue line, labeled 'Actual,' shows the historical values for each variable. The depict the median projection in each period for each variable.  The the projections are arranged from highest.  When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the middle projections. The solid red lines median value in each period is the middle projection when lowest to two

tendency for each variable in each projection period are depicted in whiskers' format.  The blue connected horizontal and vertical lines ('whiskers') the range of the projections of policymakers.  The bottom of the range for each all of the projections for that year or period.  Likewise, the top of of all of the projections for that year or period.  The light blue the central tendency, which is a narrower version of the range that The range and central 'box and represent variable is the lowest of the range is the highest shaded boxes represent excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year or period.

longer-run projections, which are shown on the far right side of the charts, are the rates to which a policymaker expects the economy to monetary policy.  Because appropriate monetary policy, by definition, is aimed at mandate of maximum employment and price stability in run, policymakers' longer-run projections for economic growth and may be interpreted, respectively, as estimates of the economy's normal or normal unemployment rate over the longer run.  The longer-run inflation is the rate of inflation judged to be most consistent with the dual mandate. The of growth, unemployment, and inflation converge over time-maybe in five or six years-in the absence of further shocks and under appropriate achieving the Federal Reserve's dual the longer unemployment trend rate of growth and its projection shown for Federal Reserve's

Explanation of Policy Path Chart

This chart is based on policymakers' assessments of appropriate monetary policy, which, by definition, is the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her interpretation of the Federal Reserve's dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.

Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point) of an participant's judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the for the federal funds rate at the end of the individual federal funds rate or the appropriate target level specified calendar year or over the longer run.