Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, September 2016

Advance  release  of  table  1  of  the  Summary  of  Economic  Projections  to  be  released  with  the  FOMC  minutes

Percent

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Projections  of change  in real gross domestic  product  (GDP)  and  projections  for  both  measures  of  inflation  are  percent  changes  from  the  fourth  quarter  of the previous year to the fourth  quarter  of  the year indicated. PCE  inflation  and  core  PCE  inflation  are  the  percentage  rates  of  change  in,  respectively,  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption expenditures  (PCE)  and  the  price  index  for PCE  excluding  food  and  energy. Projections  for the unemployment  rate  are  for  the average  civilian unemployment  rate  in  the  fourth quarter  of the year  indicated. Each  participant's  projections  are  based  on  his  or  her  assessment  of  appropriate  monetary  policy. Longer-run  projections  represent  each  participant's assessment  of  the  rate  to  which  each  variable  would  be  expected  to  converge  under  appropriate  monetary  policy  and  in  the  absence  of  further  shocks  to  the  economy. The  projections for the federal funds  rate are the value of the midpoint  of  the  projected  appropriate  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  or the projected  appropriate  target  level  for the federal funds  rate  at  the  end  of  the  specified  calendar  year  or  over  the  longer  run. The  June  projections  were  made  in  conjunction  with  the  meeting  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  on June  14-15,  2016. One  participant  did  not  submit  longer-run  projections  in  conjunction  with  the  June  14-15,  2016,  meeting. For  the  September  20-21,  2016,  meeting,  one  participant did  not  submit  longer-run  projections  for  the  change  in  real  GDP,  the  unemployment  rate,  or  the  federal  funds  rate.

- 1. For each  period, the median  is the middle  projection  when  the  projections  are  arranged  from  lowest  to  highest. When  the  number  of  projections  is  even, the median  is the average  of  the  two  middle  projections.
- 2. The  central  tendency  excludes  the  three  highest  and  three  lowest  projections  for  each  variable  in  each  year.
- 3. The  range  for  a  variable  in  a  given  year  includes  all  participants'  projections,  from  lowest  to  highest,  for  that  variable  in  that  year.
- 4. Longer-run  projections  for  core  PCE  inflation  are  not  collected.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Definitions  of variables  and  other  explanations  are  in  the  notes  to  the  projections  table. The  data  for  the actual  values  of  the  variables  are  annual.

Figure  2. FOMC  participants'  assessments  of  appropriate  monetary  policy: Midpoint  of  target  range  or  target  level  for the  federal  funds  rate

<!-- missing-text -->

Explanation of Economic Projections Charts

The charts show actual values and projections for three economic variables, based on FOMC participants' individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy:

- · Change in Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP)-as measured from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated, with values plotted at the end of each year.
- · Unemployment Rate-the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of each year, with values plotted at the end of each year.
- · PCE Inflation-as measured by the change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated, with values plotted at the end of each year.

Information for these variables is shown for each year from 2011 to 2019, and for the longer run.

The solid black line, labeled 'Actual,' shows the historical values for each variable.

The lightly shaded areas represent the ranges of the projections of policymakers.  The bottom of the range for each variable is the lowest of all of the projections for that year or period.  Likewise, the top of the range is the highest of all of the projections for that year or period.

The dark shaded areas represent the central tendency, which is a narrower version of the range that excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year or period.

The solid red line depicts the median projection in each period for each variable.  The median value in each period is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest.  When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections.

The longer-run projections, which are shown on the far right side of the charts, are the rates of growth, unemployment, and inflation to which a policymaker expects the economy to converge over time-maybe in five or six years-in the absence of further shocks and under appropriate monetary policy.  Because appropriate monetary policy, by definition, is aimed at achieving the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability in the longer run, policymakers' longer-run projections for economic growth and unemployment may be interpreted, respectively, as estimates of the economy's normal or trend rate of growth and its normal unemployment rate over the longer run.  The longer-run projection shown for inflation is the rate of inflation judged to be most consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate.

of Policy Path Chart Explanation

is based on policymakers' assessments of appropriate monetary policy, which, by the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster that best satisfy his or her interpretation of the objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. This chart definition, is outcomes for economic activity and inflation Federal Reserve's dual the value (rounded to the nearest an participant's judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the for the federal funds rate at the end of the Each shaded circle indicates ⅛ percentage point) of individual federal funds rate or the appropriate target level specified calendar year or over the longer run.