Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Strictly  nfidential  FR) Co ( Class FOMC I

MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES

Prepared for  the  Federal Open  Market Committee

By the staff Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal Reserve System

Strictly Confidential (FR)

Class I -FOMC

MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES

Recent Developments

(1) With markets placing better than even odds on  a  25  basis point rise in the federal funds rate at the September 24 FOMC meeting, the decision to  keep the intended federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent precipitated interest-rate declines on that day across the term structure, with the reaction most pronounced at shorter maturities (chart). Over the balance of the intermeeting period, the incoming data generally have pointed toward more subdued labor-cost and price pressures than had  been expected by  most market participants. Against this backdrop, the rate structure on federal funds futures contracts has flattened enough to suggest that the market on average no longer expects a  System tightening over the next few  months (chart). Although further declines at the front end of the yield curve were limited, intermediateand long-term interest rates moved down considerably further. Over the entire intermeeting period, yields on Treasury bills have slipped off 15  basis points, while those on  coupon securities have fallen some 50 to 55 basis points to their lowest levels since early March.1 Equity markets have reacted positively to the drop in interest rates and to generally favorable earnings reports, with broader indexes rising 5  percent over the intermeeting period.

<!-- missing-text -->

Federal  Funds  Futures

Rates

<!-- missing-text -->

*  Index, an

<!-- missing-text -->

J

1996=100

Weekly.  Daily  beginning eptember S 23.

- (2)  On  average in  major  foreign  industrial  countries, long-term interest rates have declined about 40  basis points  since the last FOMC meeting, while short-term rates  have moved down 10  basis points. In both cases,  these rate declines  were  a little less  than  those  in  the United States, and the dollar's weighted average exchange value edged down slightly on balance over  the  intermeeting period. However, bilateral  dollar  exchange rates  showed unusually divergent movements, in part reflecting specific factors applying to  individual  foreign countries. Official  interest rates were lowered 100  basis points in Canada and 75 basis points  in  Italy, while rates in  the  United Kingdom were raised 25  basis points.

The Desk did not  intervene.

- (3)  Available data  suggest  that private debt  has continued  to expand at  a moderate pace  in recent months, with somewhat stronger borrowing by  businesses tending  to offset a slowing in debt  growth of households. Although their  commercial paper  has been running off, nonfinancial  firms have borrowed heavily  from banks and have  tapped stock and bond markets in volume since the  latter  part of  September. The  stepup in business financing owes  in part to unusually strong merger  activity and perhaps  to  a pickup in inventory  investment. Credit supply conditions for  businesses have continued  to be favorable: Risk  spreads  in  capital markets have remained narrow, and

banks have further eased standards and terms on  business loans over the last three months, according to the most recent survey of lending officers. In the  household sector, the recent moderate pace of growth of residential mortgages likely has continued into the fourth quarter. Consumer credit growth has been subdued on  balance in recent months, perhaps in  part as a  result of rising debt burdens and  a  more restrictive posture at banks toward consumer lending. The runoff of debt of states and  municipalities has persisted on average over recent months, as advance-refunded debt has continued to  be  paid down, while federal borrowing has been light. Growth of the total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors for the year through September was at  a 5  percent rate, at the middle of the Committee's annual range.

- (4) M2 grew at  a 3  percent rate in  October, near its September pace and somewhat slower than foreseen at the time of the last FOMC meeting. The shortfall was mainly attributable to a  surprisingly large contraction in transaction deposits even after adjusting for new sweeps into the savings deposit component of M2. 2 Through October, M2 has expanded at a  4  percent rate this year, placing it in the upper half of its 1996 range. 3 M3, which grew at a  7  percent rate in
- 2. Total new sweeps were nearly $15 billion last month, a record, causing reported M1 to contract at an  18 percent rate; sweepadjusted M1  dropped at  a 1-3/4 percent rate in  October. Partly reflecting a large bank's new sweep program, reported demand deposits declined at a  27 percent annual rate in  October, with the sweepadjusted decline at a 14-1/4 percent rate. With currency expanding at a  brisk 8-3/4 percent rate, the reported monetary base was  about unchanged in October; on  a sweep-adjusted basis, the monetary base grew at a 3-3/4 percent rate.
- 3. Sizable, though slower, inflows into long-term mutual funds, as well as substantial price appreciation, pushed the estimated growth rate of M2 plus bond and stock mutual funds to  around an  11 percent rate in October.

September, picked up to a  10 percent pace last month. The acceleration, which was unforeseen at the time of the September FOMC meeting, owed mainly to a  surge in  managed liabilities in that aggregate, especially large time deposits, that were issued to fund strong bank credit expansion. The October advance brought M3 growth so far this year to the 6  percent upper bound of its annual range.

MONEY, CREDIT, AND  RESERVE AGGREGATES

(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)

<!-- missing-text -->

NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and  borrowing, are calculated by  prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance periods that overlap months. Reserve data incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirements.

Policy Alternatives

- (5) Final sales weakened more in the third quarter than estimated in the September Greenbook, and inventory accumulation was greater. In  the latest forecast, final demand is expected to rebound promptly so that inventory imbalances are avoided. The expansion of economic activity is  projected to run in line with that of potential output, assuming that the current federal funds rate is maintained through the end of 1998. In light of recent statistical evidence on compensation, the staff has made a  more optimistic assessment of the outlook for price pressures. Factoring in  as well favorable prospects for food and  energy supplies, the forecast for the CPI has  been reduced--even against the backdrop of a  lower path for the unemployment rate. The CPI is now  projected to increase less than 3 percent in 1997 and 1998. It remains the staff view, however, that resource pressures are intense enough to foster an  upward tilt to the underlying trend of  wage and price inflation. Indeed, the rise in the core inflation rate from 2-3/4 percent this year to 3 percent in each of the next two years would be larger still were it not for technical changes in the index.
- (6) If the Committee views the staff forecast as both likely and acceptable, it presumably would favor standing pat--alternative B. Even if the Committee found unacceptable the forecasted upcreep in core inflation (abstracting from technical CPI adjustments), it  might want to wait for more evidence that such an outcome is in train before taking action. The overutilization of resources may  be  seen as staying modest in any event, and thus policy inaction at this meeting would not seem to risk allowing inflation to  rise so  much that jarring

adjustments to employment and output would be  required eventually.

- (7) With market participants widely expecting policy to remain on  hold for some time, the Committee's selection of alternative B should elicit little response in financial markets. Assuming that developments over the intermeeting period play out in  accord with the staff projection, which appears aligned with most market forecasts, there is no  reason to anticipate that interest rates will break out of their recent range. Similarly, the dollar should trade on  foreign exchange markets around its recent levels.
- (8) A  policy tightening, such as the 50 basis point firming of the federal funds rate under alternative C, might be  favored should the Committee wish to  move promptly to  counter the updrift in underlying inflation embedded in the staff outlook. Furthermore, the Committee may be concerned about additional upside risks to the inflation outlook: For example, recent wage data may be  misleading and the widely reported tightness of labor markets could be reflected soon in  much more sizable increases in labor costs. Or spending might snap back more forcefully than envisioned by the staff--especially in light of the recent rallies in  bond and  stock markets--and intensify pressures on resource utilization.
- (9) The  choice of alternative C  would come as a  surprise to market participants. Most likely, they would infer that the Committee sees considerably more risk of greater inflation pressures than is generally perceived. Interest rates could rise markedly across the term structure--perhaps almost as much at short-term maturities as the 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate. Higher real interest rates would be  likely to  boost the dollar on foreign exchange

markets. Financial prices could be volatile for a  time as  market participants reappraised the economic outlook and the likely path for monetary policy, and  appreciable declines in equity values cannot be ruled out.

(10) A  50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate, as under alternative A, might be  favored if the Committee viewed the recent softness of final sales as likely to persist. Under those circumstances, inventories may turn out  higher than firms desire, imparting an  additional drag on  production over the next couple of quarters. But even if the staff forecast of spending is accepted, the Committee may  view the recent favorable performance of wages and prices as suggesting that the natural rate of  unemployment is still lower than that implicit in the staff's inflation forecast. If so, the economy may not  have overshot its potential, and  price pressures may  be  weaker than in the staff forecast.

(11) While some talk has surfaced in the market that the next policy move might be toward ease, participants do  not foresee a reduction in the intended federal funds rate at this meeting. A  50 basis point reduction in the funds rate, as under alternative A,  would most likely be  read as evidence that the Committee has serious reservations about the prospects for spending. In this event, sizable reductions in  nominal and  real market yields would likely be induced across the term structure. However, the easing might also be  taken by the market as  revealing a  greater willingness on  the part of the Committee to risk an  uptick in inflation as it undertook to test the upside of potential output. If  doubts about the Committee's resolve to contain inflation were to become prevalent in the market, which

might be especially likely should incoming data indicate buoyant spending or increased inflation pressures, nominal intermediateand longer-term yields could begin to reverse their initial declines. In any case, the dollar would most likely weaken on foreign exchange markets.

(12) Under the staff forecast, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is anticipated to continue to expand at  a  moderate pace into early 1997. Consumer credit picks up  in coming months in keeping with the projected near-term rebound in consumer spending, especially on durable goods. In contrast, mortgage borrowing should slow a  bit with softening housing activity. In the staff projection, the pace of business borrowing remains brisk, in  keeping with somewhat enlarged external financing needs. With growth of federal government debt remaining sluggish, total domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to expand at a  4-3/4 percent pace through next March. This implies growth for 1996 at around the 5  percent midpoint of its annual range.

(13) In coming months, offering rates on M2 accounts are not expected to change much under alternative B,  maintaining opportunity costs at around their recent levels. M2 growth over the October-toMarch period is expected to quicken to a  4-1/4 percent rate from the unexpectedly weak advance in  September and October, reflecting the projected speedup in  nominal spending in the staff forecast. 4 This

strengthening in  M2 does not show through to M3, as banks lessen their net issuance of managed liabilities, and the broader aggregate is seen as expanding at  a  6-1/4 percent pace over the next five months. The implied growth of M2 for 1996 as a  whole is 4 percent, in the upper half of its range, compared with a  4-1/2 percent rate projected in the September bluebook. The  growth of M3 for the year is  projected at 6 percent, at the upper bound of its range and slightly higher than the 5-3/4 percent rate forecast for this aggregate in the previous bluebook.

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

5

Directive Language

(14) Presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.

OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH

In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to  DECREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT)/maintain/INCREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of  pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and  giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT) or (SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser reserve restraint (WOULD) might be  acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be  consistent with moderate growth in  M2 and  RELATIVELY STRONG EXPANSION IN  M3 over coming months.

SELECTED INTEREST RATES (percent)

<!-- missing-text -->

NOTE: Weekly data for columns 1 through 11 are  statement  week averages. Data in olumn 7  are  taken  from Donoghue's  Money c Fund Report.  Columns 12,13 and 14 are  1-day  quotes for Friday,  hursday or  Friday,  espectively, T r following  he  end of  the  statement  week. Column t 13 Is  he  Bond  Buyer revenue t index. Column  14 is  he t FNMA purchase yield,  lus p loan servicing fee, on  30-day mandatory delivery  ommitments.  Column  15 is he  average c t contract  ate n new commitments  for ixed-rate rtgages (FRMs)  with r o f mo 80 percent  loan-to-value  atios  t ajor  Institutional ders.  olumn r a m len C 16 is the  average  initial tract  ate n new commitments  for -year,  djustablecon r o 1 a rate ortgages  (ARMs)  at  major institutional  ders  offering  oth FRMs m len b and ARMs with  the  same  number of discount  points.

p  -

d

preliminary  ata

Money and Credit Aggregate Measures

Seasonally adjusted

Strictly  onfidential  FR)- C ( Clas II FOMC

NOVEMBER 12 1996

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Adjusted for  breaks  caused  by reclassifications.
- 2. Debt data are on a  monthly  average basis, erived d by averaging end-of-month  levels  of  adjacent  months,  and have  been  adjusted to  remove discontinuities.

Components of Money Stock  and Related  Measures

easmonaIly adusted

Strictly nfidential FR)- Co ( Class II OMC F

NOVB1BER 12,  1996

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Includes money market deposit accounts.
- 2. Includes retail  epurchase  agreements.  All  IRA and Keogh r accounts  at  commercial banks  and thrift stitutions e subtracted from small in ar time deposits.
- 3. Excludes IRA and  Keogh accounts.
- 4. Net of  large  denomination time  deposits held by money market  mutual  funds,  depository institutions,  S.  government,  and foreign  banks  and  official  stitutions. U. in
- 5. Net of  money market  mutual  fund holdings of  these items.
- 6. Includes both overnight and term.

NET  CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF  SECURITES 1

Millions  of  dollars,  ot  seasonally adjusted n

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CLASS II-FOMC

November 8,1996

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Change  from end-of-period o  end-of-period. t
- 4.  Reflects et  change  in  redemptions n (-) of  Treasury  and agency securities.
- 2.  Outright ransactions  n arket and with  foreign ccounts. t i m a
- 5.  Includes  change  in  RPs  (+), atched  sale-purchase  transactions  -), nd matched  purchase sale  transactions  +). m ( a (
- 3.  Outright  transactions  in market  and  with foreign  accounts,  and  short-term  notes acquired 6.  The levels f  agency issues ere as  follows: o w
- in exchange  for aturing bills.  xcludes maturity  shifts  nd  rollovers  f  maturing  issues. m E a o

<!-- missing-text -->