Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES

Prepared for  the Federal  Open  Market Committee

By the staff Board  of  Governors of  the Federal  Reserve System

Confidential (FR)

MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES

Recent Developments

(1) At  the conclusion of its meeting on  December 19, the FOMC announced a  slight easing of reserve market conditions, trimming the federal funds rate from 5-3/4 percent to 5-1/2 percent. In  implementing that policy over the intermeeting period, Desk operations were complicated by  large swings in  reserve demands associated with the year-end and  in  reserve supplies stemming from  variations in  the Treasury cash  balance and  the effects of foul winter weather on  float. 1 As  a  consequence, the federal funds rate was volatile at times, although it averaged close to its intended level. 2

(2) Most market interest rates have fallen 15 to  35  basis points, on  balance, since the last FOMC meeting, with a  portion of that decline following on  the  heels of  the Committee's action. As  the intermeeting period unfolded, the expectation of fiscal restraint, the soft tone of  anecdotal information and  of some of  the limited official data releases, and  renewed concerns about the  vigor of  the expansion in  several of our  major trading partners apparently led  many analysts to  trim their assessment of  the  near-term prospects for spending. In reflection of this revised outlook, market participants seem to  have built in  a  greater degree of  easing in  Federal Reserve policy in  coming  months, judging from futures rates (chart). In capital markets,

Chart 1

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Jan 1994=100

Weekly. Daily  after  Dec.

*Index,

18.

the  largest decline in one-year forward rates for Treasury securities, about 35 basis points, was posted at  one- to five-year maturities (chart). Market prices proved sensitive to the give and take of the debate on the budget in Washington. At  times, bond yields approached two-year lows as investors  anticipated the possibility of an agreement that  would bring the budget into balance early in the next  decade--or at  least considerable near-term fiscal restraint when the economy already might be softening. Although the Secretary of the Treasury has warned that he will run out of room to  borrow no later than March 1, financial markets  are placing almost no weight on the possibility of default. Most major equity indexes  rose 2 to 3-1/2 percent  over the  intermeeting period.

(3)  Despite  the decline in U.S. interest rates,  the dollar's weighted-average exchange value rose a little more than  3  percent over the  intermeeting period. Upward movements against European currencies were  associated with even larger decreases  in most  interest rates there than in the United States, owing to increasing signs of weakening economic growth and related expectations of monetary easing. Interest rates  in Japan generally rose in anticipation of economic recovery, but  the dollar nonetheless appreciated against the yen on further  signs of a narrowing of U.S. and Japanese current account imbalances.

- ;  the  Desk did not  intervene.
- (4) Incoming information suggests that  the expansion of  debt slowed in recent months, with total debt growing at  an average annual rate  of only  3-3/4 percent  over the  final two months of  1995.3 The

deceleration owed  primarily to  net federal debt, which did  not increase on  a  seasonally adjusted basis, in  part because, in order to deal with  debt-ceiling constraints, the Treasury relied more on  running down its cash balance than seasonal norms and  because spending was held down  by  restrictive continuing resolutions. Growth of  debt of  nonfederal sectors in  recent months remained on  the slow track established around mid-year. Nonetheless, households continued to borrow at a  brisk pace, despite rising debt-service burdens and  delinquency rates. Capital market issuance held steady, in  part as some corporations took advantage of  lower market rates to fund longer term and  replace bank debt. There were a  few indications that obtaining credit might be getting harder--or at least that the  trend toward greater availability is coming to  an end: Several bank loan officers reported recently that lending standards had  been tightened for both consumer and  business borrowers. However, borrowing terms remained attractive, with spreads narrow in  the market and  still being eased at banks, although not as aggressively.

(5)  Preliminary data suggest that bank credit growth has picked up  noticeably in  January from the sluggish pace that marked the closing months of 1995, even as  banks lightened their holdings of government securities and securitized some of  their loans. In  particular, the growth of  total loans has picked up  briskly this month, pulled along by  strength in  the  business and consumer categories. With bank credit reviving, M3 also staged a  comeback, growing at rates of 4-1/4 and 8-1/4 percent, respectively, in  December and  January. 4

On  a  fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, M3 increased at  a  6 percent rate, placing it at the upper bound of its 2-to-6 percent annual range.

(6) The expansion of  M2, at a  rate of 5-1/2 percent over the last two  months, picked up  a  bit relative both to  the sluggish pace of the fall and to staff expectations at the  time of  the December FOMC meeting. Further declines in  money market rates compared with sluggishly adjusting rates on  deposits and  money market funds and  the flatness of the term structure appear to have made M2 assets relatively more attractive. Some of the growth in  M2  came at the expense of  bond  mutual funds, which continued to  post light inflows, and, perhaps, at the expense of  direct investment in securities, although information on such  portfolio flows is  scant.5 All told, M2  in  the fourth quarter was  4-1/4 percent above its level in the fourth quarter of 1994, in  the  upper portion on  its 2-to-5 percent annual range, and its velocity, although most likely edging higher in  the fourth quarter, was flat on  the  year.

(7) M1  continues to  run off, contracting at rates of 4-1/2 and 6-1/2 percent in  December and  January, respectively. 6 Programs to sweep funds from  OCDs to  avoid reserve requirements have spread further, serving to  trim  about 12-1/4 percentage points from average growth rates of the aggregate in the  past two months. 7 Currency

growth, however, revived some, in  part owing to  a  stirring in foreign demands in  December. Demand deposits grew at about a  10 percent rate on  average over the past two months, partly as  the pickup in  mortgage activity induced some temporary flows through those accounts. For 1995, M1  contracted 1-3/4 percent, but absent retail sweeps it  would have expanded 1-1/2 percent based on initial amounts swept.

MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES (Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Includes "other extended credit" from  the Federal Reserve.

NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and  borrowing, are calculated by  prorating averages for  two-week reserve maintenance periods that overlap months. Reserve data incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirements.

Long-Run Scenarios

(8)  This section considers the implications of alternative long-run strategies for monetary policy and  highlights several risks to the staff's assessment of  economic prospects. The first set of scenarios examines two alternative strategies with different economic outcomes that the Committee might pursue. The  baseline strategy begins with the Greenbook's projection for 1996 and 1997 and  thereafter keeps inflation steady at  about 3 percent. The tighter strategy extends the  higher funds rate scenario of  the Greenbook, with the objective of attaining price stability shortly after the turn of the decade. 8

(9) Both the baseline and tighter scenarios embody the same underlying assumptions concerning macroeconomic forces and  relationships. With regard to fiscal policy, both assume no  further progress in  reducing the federal deficit through the seven-year simulation period.1 0 Also in  both simulations, the natural rate of  unemployment is  assumed to  be 5-3/4 percent. In light of  the various uncertainties associated with  any forecasting exercise, the results reported below should be  read only as suggestive of  the general patterns likely to  be  engendered by  each of the  alternatives.

(10) Under the baseline strategy, the Committee does not take active steps to  reduce inflation below its current trend of 3 percent. As shown in  the top  panel of Chart 2,  the  nominal federal funds rate is  maintained at 5-1/2 percent; the associated real rate of 2-1/2 percent puts the economy in  the neighborhood of its potential. Under the tighter scenario, the  Committee actively promotes long-term price stability by  raising the federal funds rate by  100 basis points over the course of  1996 and  maintaining it at this level in  1997. This initial restraint must be followed by  reductions in  the nominal funds rate that outpace the drop in  the inflation rate. The real funds rate must be lowered to  move policy to  a  neutral stance in  order to avoid overshooting price stability. While output returns to  potential over time, the sacrifice ratio in  the  model implies that reducing inflation 2  percentage points, as in  this strategy, entails a  cumulative output loss of approximately 8 percent of  potential GDP in the interim. However, the model does not include forward-looking expectations that might allow a possible role for  central bank credibility in lowering the  cost of  attaining price stability. Nor does the  model incorporate a  significant long-term gain in  potential output growth from reducing inflation.

(11) Chart 3  indicates economic outcomes that could result if the real equilibrium federal funds rate were shocked up  or  down  by  50 basis points in 1996:Q1. Such a  shock could arise from higher or lower aggregate demand than  projected, or  lower or higher potential output, which in  turn might arise from a  change in  the natural rate

ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES FOR MONETARY POLICY

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

SHOCKS TO  THE EQUILIBRIUM REAL FUNDS RATE (FIFTY BASIS POINTS)

No  Policy  Response

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

of  unemployment.11 In  the top  panel, the  Committee is  assumed not to adjust the  nominal funds rate over the next three years in  response to this shock, but instead it keeps the funds rate along the  baseline path. The resulting imbalance between the actual and equilibrium real rates sets off ever increasing or  decreasing inflation, which in  turn serves to  widen the  real rate imbalance over time--exacerbating the inflation instabilities.

(12) The divergences of inflation from the  baseline become perceptible only after the first year or so. The lower two panels assume that, after a year, accumulating evidence that the equilibrium real federal funds rate has changed prompts the Committee to  respond. These responses, shown in the  middle panel, are calibrated to  bring inflation back to the 3  percent baseline path at the end  of  the simulation period. In  order to  do  so, the Committee must offset the inadvertent stimulus or restraint, resulting from  the lag in  adjusting policy, by  subsequently holding the real rate above, or below, its equilibrium value for a  time. The deliberate overshooting of  the equilibrium funds rate is mirrored in  an  overshooting of  the natural rate of unemployment in the opposite direction. The symmetry of the paths of inflation in  these simulations stems from the specification that the  Committee had  a  fixed goal for inflation of  3 percent. If, instead, the Committee were to follow an "opportunistic" strategy, it would lean in  the required direction against unexpected upward shocks to  the equilibrium rate of interest, but for downward shocks it  would not ease as  much as in this simulation. This smaller amount of

easing, sufficient to return the economy to its potential but not beyond, would lock in  the decline in  the inflation resulting from the inadvertently restrictive policy during the  period of the recognition lag.

Long-Run Ranges for 1996

(13) As  background for  the Committee's discussion of its money and debt ranges for 1996, the table below presents projections for the growth of  money and  credit consistent with the staff Greenbook forecast.

<!-- missing-text -->

(14) The staff projects M2 growth of 5-1/4 percent in  1996, up  from 4-1/4 percent last year. Such growth would be  a  bit faster than that of  nominal GDP, implying a  slight drop in the velocity of  M2 after little change last year (chart 4). The  projected decline of velocity reflects the effects of  the recent flattening of the yield curve, which will enhance the attractiveness of liquid monetary assets relative to  longer-term investments. 1 2 The standard staff econometric model of  M2 demand, which explains longer-run velocity movements solely by short-term opportunity costs, forecasts essentially no change in  velocity for 1996, given the flat funds rate in  the Greenbook forecast. The  model underpredicted M2 growth by  about 2  percentage points last year, and  the staff believes that the decline in longterm rates contributed to the forecast error; the staff M2  projection

ACTUAL AND PROJECTED VELOCITY OF M2  AND M3*

<!-- missing-text -->

*Projections

f

are based on staff  orecasts f

o

GDP

and money.

ACTUAL AND PROJECTED VELOCITY OF  M1 AND DEBT*

<!-- missing-text -->

*Projections

f

are based on staff  orecasts  f

o

GDP, money,  and debt.

for 1996 implicitly allows for a  similar type of, albeit smaller, model error this year.

(15) The staff forecast calls for  M3 growth of 5-3/4 percent over 1996, down from 6 percent last year, implying a  somewhat smaller decline in  M3 velocity than  last year. The slight slowing of M3 from 1995 reflects an  anticipated 1-1/4 percentage point moderation in  bank credit growth (after adjustment for security revaluations), which is only partly offset by  a modest step-up in  thrift asset expansion. Bank funding needs are held down by  weaker loan demand, as  households and  businesses rely  more on  long-term borrowing in  response to the decline in  bond and  mortgage rates in  recent months. The  projection makes some allowance for  a  shift to  deposit funding as a  consequence of  the recent elimination of deposit insurance premiums for  wellcapitalized banks, but banks may become even more willing to  issue, and  price attractively, wholesale deposits that are included in  M3 than assumed in  the staff's projection.

(16) The staff is  projecting growth of domestic nonfinancial debt this year at 4-1/2 percent. Both the federal and  nonfederal components are seen as growing at rates close to  that of nominal GDP. The  moderation in  nonfederal credit demands from last year in  part reflects some backing off of  consumer installment borrowing, as  both borrowers and  lenders become a  bit  more cautious in  the face of rising debt repayment burdens. By  contrast, growth of home mortgage debt is projected to  maintain the pace of  the last couple of  years, accompanied by  a  little further pickup in refinancing activity. In  the business sector, increases in internal funds should help to damp

credit demands as  equity retirements and  spending on  new  capital remain at the levels of 1995.

(17) The table below compares money and debt under the Greenbook baseline forecast with the  economic forecasts embodying easier and tighter monetary policies that are discussed in  Part I  of the Greenbook. Whereas the federal funds rate is assumed to  remain at 5-1/2 percent in  1996 under the Greenbook baseline, the funds rate in the alternative strategies is gradually lowered or  raised to  reach a level in  the fourth quarter of  this year that is 1  percentage point below or  above the baseline. The impact of these policy differences on  the growth of nominal GDP is  only about 1/4 percentage point this year, though that difference would widen in  1997. The differences in nominal GDP show through to  the  monetary aggregates and  debt. In addition, M2 and, to a  lesser extent, M3  would be  affected in  the same direction by  the alternative paths for interest rates and, hence, opportunity costs.14

(18) The table also shows three alternative sets of  ranges for  M2, M3, and  debt for 1996 for  Committee consideration. 1 5 Alternative I represents the provisional ranges selected by  the Committee last July. Alternatives II  and III raise the M2 and  M3 ranges by 1 and 2 percentage points, respectively. The range for debt under all three alternatives is held at its  provisional level of 3  to 7 percent because the staff projection under all three policies is in  the  middle portion of this range.

<!-- missing-text -->

(19) On  average over the last two  years, the velocities of  M2 and  M3 have been behaving more in  line with historical relationship, than they did  earlier in  the 1990s. This might raise questions about whether the aggregates are conveying information about the paths of nominal GDP  and spending and  whether the Committee should increase the attention paid to them. Major and  persistent deviations from expectations in  the expansion of  money and  debt may  be symptomatic of  unanticipated developments in  the intermediation and credit process that should be  examined for their potential implications for the economy. However, the staff believes that considerable doubts remain as to the relationships between the aggregates and  nominal GDP, given the aberrant behavior in  the early 1990s, which in  retrospect is still partly inexplicable, and  the increased availability of other financial instruments, notably bond and  stock mutual funds. Consequently, a longer period of  time during which the  behavior of  velocity can  be assessed under a  variety of economic and  financial circumstances is probably required before much  weight can  be  placed on  those aggregates.

(20) The staff baseline forecasts for  M2 and  M3 are, respectively, above and  near the upper bounds of the provisional ranges of alternative I. If the Committee viewed the role of the ranges as one

of communicating to  the public the rates of  money growth that it expected would accompany its desired outcome for the economy and  prices in 1996, adoption of  alternative I would seem  most consistent with a deliberate disinflation policy (tighter alternative). In  recent semiannual monetary policy reports to the Congress, however, the Federal Reserve has explained that these relatively low  ranges were not centered on  the Committee's expectations for money growth, but rather were indicative of  money expansion under conditions of  price stability if  velocity were to  behave in  line with its historical pattern. The Committee has noted in these reports that actual growth could even run above the ranges in  the transition to price stability. In  this context, frequent alteration of  the annual ranges would risk confusing observers about the Committee's ultimate policy intent. The  remaining uncertainty about the  behavioral properties of  the broad measures going forward may  reinforce Committee reluctance to "fine-tune" its annual ranges, especially if the Committee were concerned that such adjustments might be interpreted as implying that it  was placing more weight on  these indicators than it intended.

(21) Alternative II  nods in  the direction of acknowledging the upside probabilities embodied in the staff M2 and  M3 projections by raising their ranges by  enough clearly to  encompass--albeit in the upper portions--the staff baseline money forecast. By  encompassing expected money growth this alternative still could be  seen as consistent with the baseline Greenbook forecast for the economy. Under the "easier" strategy, M2  would be  just as likely as  not to overshoot its upper bound, and  there would also be  risks in  this regard if  lower interest rates were required to  achieve the nominal income in  the staff forecast. This alternative might also be  in accord with an

opportunistic disinflation strategy in  that M2 is expected to lie in the upper portion of its range, implying stronger reactions to upward than to  downward demand shocks to  nominal income and inflation, as discussed in  the previous section. Should the inflation rate move down further in  later years, the ranges could be  restored to their current provisional settings.

(22) Alternative III better centers projected baseline growth of  both M2 and  M3 within the ranges. Choice of this alternative would seem to  rest on  the view  that the ranges should be  mainly oriented toward providing Congress and  the  public with an  estimated growth interval for each aggregate over the relevant year that essentially balances the risks of  an  overor  undershoot if the economy performs as  the Committee expects. Under such an  approach, the Committee would attempt to incorporate fully in  advance intermediate-run effects, such as responsiveness to interest-rate movements or other factors, into the specified ranges. More willingness to  adjust the current year's ranges at  mid-year also could be  part of  this approach. This approach would not  necessarily imply that the Committee would place more weight on  the aggregates in  the conduct of  policy. Indeed, the Committee could continue to  deemphasize the  use of  the ranges as intermediate policy targets. Alternative III would seem especially appealing in the context of conveying information about expected money growth if the Committee had  a  fairly strong presumption that further easing actions could well prove warranted this year to forestall an  unacceptably weak economic performance or  to adjust to lessening inflation pressures. Or, if  the Committee accepts the relationships embedded in the staff forecast, this alternative could seem attractive if the

Committee did  not contemplate downward pressure on  inflation this year through either a  deliberate or  opportunistic strategy.

Short-run Policy Alternatives

(23) The unchanged funds rate of  alternative B  is  consistent with the staff Greenbook forecast. In  that forecast, with a  steady nominal funds rate, the unemployment rate remains a  touch below the staff's estimate of the natural rate and core inflation edges higher, but only to about 3 percent in  1997. Not only might alternative B  be seen as attractive if  the Committee concurred with this outlook and found the results acceptable, but it also  might have appeal as a  "wait and see" strategy because delays in  data have curtailed the new  information available to the Committee since it eased policy in December. A  similar point could be  made about the fiscal situation, which might be  clarified to some extent in  the  next few  weeks given negotiations now  underway between the President and  Congressional leaders.

(24) The staff outlook appears to  be  more buoyant than that of  market participants, who evidently view the odds of  a  modest policy easing at the upcoming meeting to  be  about even and  expect appreciable declines in  the funds rate over coming months. Thus, rates could edge higher under alternative B.16 However, the extent of any  rise in such rates likely would be tempered in  the near term  by  the perception that the  Committee had  merely postponed easing pending the availability of more information. Over time, an  economy and  monetary policy more consistent with the staff outlook than that of  the  market would put additional upward pressure on  rates. The dollar would be  expected to  trade around recent higher levels on foreign exchange markets. Markets are likely to continue to  pay close attention to shifting

fiscal prospects, and if  potential default on  Treasury debt still looms in  late February, markets could become skittish, given that the Treasury has indicated that its scope to  maneuver to  avoid default will be  exhausted by  the  beginning of  March.

(25) Justification for a  quarter-point reduction in  the federal funds rate under alternative A  would seem  to  rest on  a  belief that the  economy is  weaker than in the  staff outlook, as  might be inferred from the tone of  some anecdotal reports and  recent data, or that the prospects for disinflation are brighter. In  this regard, the effects of the recently firmer dollar on  spending and  prices might be seen as giving scope for some modest lowering of interest rates. An easing in  the next few  months, although not necessarily at this meeting, is consistent with expectations both of  market participants, as embodied in  the  yield curve, and,  as suggested by  the Blue Chip survey, of  many outside forecasters whose inflation outlook on  average nonetheless does not differ significantly from the staff's.

(26) Money market interest rates would fall by  less than a quarter point under alternative A,  given current expectations. Such a decline in  the federal funds rate could be  achieved by  adding nonborrowed reserves through open  market operations, reducing the borrowing allowance by  a  small amount, or  through a  25  basis point reduction in the discount rate to 5 percent. 1 7 Intermediateand long-term interest rates could drop significantly should market participants view actions at two successive meetings as suggesting that the Federal Reserve had  reason to  believe that economy is  weak and inflation risks

are  minimal. Against this background, incoming economic data suggesting a more buoyant economy could cause a  sharp reversal of  the interest rate declines.

(27) If the Committee agreed with the staff outlook for spending and  inflation and  wanted to  make deliberate progress toward price stability, the choice of a  quarter-point increase in the federal funds rate under alternative C might be favored. Such a  policy tightening would come as  a  complete surprise to  market participants, and short-term interest rates would rise substantially. Intermediateand long-term rates would also move appreciably higher, especially in  real terms, as  market participants re-evaluated the expected path for  monetary policy. With the direction of interest rates here and  abroad beginning to diverge, the dollar could well strengthen further on foreign exchange markets.

(28) The table below shows money and  credit growth under alternative B  for the  January-to-June period. Relative to the  experience of  recent months, we  would expect some pickup in  credit growth to  accompany the staff GDP  projection, partly as the federal government returns to  more normal patterns of funding and  cash balances given the assumed lifting of the debt ceiling. Growth of total debt of  domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to expand at a 6 percent rate from  January to  June, leaving this aggregate around the center of its tentative range for 1996. The  expansion in  M2 is  expected to continue to  be supported by  last year's declines in  opportunity costs and the relatively flat yield curve. The spread of

sweeps will lead to further reductions in  M1 and  the reserve aggregates. By  midyear M2  would be  at or slightly above its 1-to-5 percent tentative 1996 range under all three alternatives. M3 at  midyear would be  just within its 2-to-6 percent range.

M2 5 M3 5-1/2 M1 -2-3/4 Adjusted for  sweeps 3-3/4 Debt 6 Federal 8 Nonfederal 5-1/4

<!-- missing-text -->

Directive  anguage L

(29) Presented below for the members' consideration is  draft wording relating to  the Committee's ranges for  the aggregates in  1996 and the operating paragraph for  the intermeeting period.

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in  output. In  furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at [DEL: its] THIS meeting  [DEL:in  y Jul reaffirmed e th range it had]  stablished  NGES e RA [DEL: on January 31 -- ebruary  1] or  growth of M2 F f AND M3 OF ___  O __ T AND __ TO ___  PERCENT RESPECTIVELY [DEL: of 1  to  5 percent],  asured from me the fourth quarter of [DEL:  ] 1994 1995 to  the fourth quarter of [DEL:  ] 1995 1996. The  [DEL:  ittee Comm also retained the]  onitoring m range  DEL:   to  7 percent or he  year  that [of 3 f t it had set]  r fo growth of  total domestic nonfinancial debt WAS SET AT ___ TO ___  RCENT PE FOR THE YEAR. The [DEL:  ee  raised  he Committ t 1995 range for M3  to 2 to 6 percent as  a technical djustment  o a t take  account  of  changing  intermediation  rns. patte For 1996, the  Committee established   a on tentative  asis he b t samme ranges  as in  1995  for  growth  of  the  monetary aggregates  nd debt, a measured from the  fourth uarter q of 1995 o  the  ourth t f quarter of  6.] 199 The behavior  of the monetary aggregates will continue to  be  evaluated in  the light of  progress toward price level stability, movements in  their velocities, and  developments in  the economy and financial markets.

OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH

In  the implementation of  policy for  the immediate future, the  Committee seeks to  decrease slightly (SOMEWHAT)/MAINTAIN/INCREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of  pressure on  reserve positions. In  the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for  price stability and sustainable economic growth, and  giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and  monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT) or  slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be  acceptable in  the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to  be  consistent with  moderate growth in  M2 and  M3 over coming months.

APPENDIX A

MONEY STOCK REVISIONS

Measures of  the money stock have been revised to  incorporate the results of the annual benchmark and  seasonal factor review, as well as a minor redefinition of  M2. The attached tables compare growth rates of the  old  and revised series. These data should be regarded as strictly confidential until their release to  the public in mid-February.

The revisions had  no  net effect on the annual growth rate of M2 over 1995, but they raised the annual growth rates of  M1 and  M3 by 0.1 percentage point over the past year. For earlier years, revisions to the annual growth rates of  M2 ranged between -0.5 and +0.4 percentage  point, while the annual growth rates of  M1  and  M3  were revised by  smaller amounts.

Redefinition

There has been a  minor redefinition of  M2, involving a  shift of the volatile overnight wholesale RPs and  Eurodollars from  M2 into non-M2 M3. The redefinition, which did  not affect M1  or  M3, lowered M2 in all  years since 1969, by  amounts that cumulated to  $118 billion in 1995.

Benchmark Revisions

The benchmark incorporates minor revisions to data reported on  the detailed weekly and  quarterly deposit reports, and  it  takes account of  deposit data from  call reports for  banks and  thrifts that do  not report on  any of the detailed deposit reports. The benchmark also incorporates historical data for a  number of  money market mutual funds that began reporting for  the first time during 1995, raising the levels of  M2 and  M3  over the  year by  amounts that cumulate to $1 billion and $9  billion, respectively.

Seasonal Review Revisions

In  a process similar to that used in  previous years, seasonal factors for the  monetary aggregates have been revised using the  X-11 ARIMA procedure applied to the  benchmarked data through December 1995. However, this year, seasonal factors were constructed for total RPs and  total Eurodollar deposits, both of  which are now  entirely in  nonM2 M3. Furthermore, seasonally adjusted non-M1 M2 and  non-M2 M3  have each  been redefined to  be  the sum  of their seasonally adjusted components; previously, both non-M1 M2 and  non-M2 M3  were seasonally adjusted as a whole.

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

ADOPTED LONGER-RUN RANGES FOR THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES (percent nnual ates) a r

<!-- missing-text -->

NOTE: Numbers in  parentheses  re  actual  rowth  rates  s  reported  t nd  of  policy  eriod n ebruary  Monetary  Policy eport o a g a a e p i F R t Congress.  Subsequent  revisions   historical  ta not eflected ove)  have  altered  rowth  rates to da ( r ab g by up to  a  few  tenths  f  a  percent o n.s.--not  ecified. sp

Footnotes n following  age o p

- 1. Targets re  for ank  credit  ntil a b u 1983; from 1983 onward targets e or omestic  nonfinancial ctor  ebt. ar f d se d
- 2. The figures  hown reflect rget  nd  actual  rowth  of 1-B  in  1980  and  shift-adjusted B  in  1981. M1-B  was s ta a g M M1relabelled   in anuary  1982.  The targeted owth  for 1-A  was 3-1/2 o  6 percent n  1980 (actual  rowth  was 5.0 M1 J gr M t i g percent);  n  1981 targeted  rowth  for hift-adjusted  A  was 3  to -1/2 ercent  actual owth  was 1.3  percent). i g s M15 p ( gr
- 3.  When  these  anges ere set,  hifts to ther  heckable eposits  n  1980 were  expected o  have  only  a  limited  ffect r w s in o c d i t e on  growth  of 1-A  and  M1-B. As the ear  progressed, wever, anks  offered  ther heckable eposits  ore actively, M y ho b o c d m and  more funds han  expected ere  directed  o  these ccounts.  uch shifts e  estimated  o  have  decreased 1-A  growth t w t a S ar t M and  increased  1-B  growth  each M by at  least  /2  percentage  oint ore than  had  been  anticipated. 1 p m
- 4. Adjusted or  the ffects  f  shifts t  of emand deposits  nd  savings eposits.   the ebruary OMC f e o ou d a d At F F meeting, he t target  anges or bserved 1-A  and  M1-B  in  1981 on an  unadjusted  asis,  xpected o e consistent  th  the djusted r f o M b e t b wi a ranges,  ere  -(4-1/2)   -2  and  6  to  8-1/2 ercent,  espectively.  tual 1-B  growth  (not hift  djusted)  as 5.0 ercent. w to p r Ac M s a w p
- 5.  Adjusted or  shifts   assets  rom  domestic anking  offices  o  International king  Facilities. f of f b t Ban
- 6. Range for ank credit  s  annualized  rowth  from the ecember  1981 -January  1982 average evel  hrough he  fourth b i g D l t t quarter  f  1982. o
- 7.  Base  period,  dopted t he uly  1983 FOMC a a t J meeting, s  1983 QII. At the ebruary  1983 meeting, he OMC i F t F had adopted  a 1982 QIV to  1983 QIV target  ange  for 1  of  4 to  8  percent. r M
- 8.  Base  period  s he  February-March  1983 average. i t
- 9.  Base  period,  dopted t  the uly  1985 FOMC a a J meeting, s  1985 QII. At the ebruary  1983 meeting, he OMC i F t F had adopted  a  1984 QIV  to  1985 QIV target  ange  for 1  of   to  7 percent. r M 4
- 10.  No range or 1  has  been  specified  ince he ebruary  1987  FOMC f M s t F meeting  because f  uncertainties  out ts o ab i underlying  elationship    the ehavior f he  economy and  its ensitivity  economic  and  financial rcumstances. r to b o t s o ci
- 11. At the  February  1990  meeting, he OMC t F specified    range  of -1/2 o  6-1/2 ercent.  his  range  was lowered  to  1  to a 2 t p T 5  percent  t he uly 990 meeting. a t J 1
- 12.  At  the ebruary  1993 meeting, he OMC F t F specified    range  of  2  to   percent  or 2, 1/2  to -1/2 ercent  or 3, a 6 f M 4 p f M and  4-1/2 o  8-1/2 ercent or omestic onfinancial bt.  hese  ranges ere  lowered  to  1  to  5  percent or 2, 0  to t p f d n de T w f M 4 percent or 3, and  4 to  8 percent  or omestic  nonfinancial bt t he uly  1993 meeting. f M f d de a t J
- 13.  At the ebruary  1995 FOMC F meeting, he  FOMC t specified    range  of   to   percent. his  range  was raised  o  2  to  6 a 0 4 T t percent t  the  July  1995 meeting. a

SELECTED INTEREST RATES

(percent)

<!-- missing-text -->

Money and  Credit  Aggregate  Measures

Seasonallyadjusted

JANUARY29,1996

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Debt data  are  on a  monthly  average  basis, erived d by averaging  end-of-month  levels  f djacent onths,  and have been adjusted o  remove discontinuities. o a m t
- 1. Adjusted for breaks  caused by reclassifications.
- p preliminary

Monetary data are  pre-benchmark, that is. they do NOT incorporate revisions from the most recent annual benchmark and seasonal review.

- pe preliminary timate es

Components  of  Money  Stock  and Related  Measures

Seasonally  djusted  nless  therwise  oted a u o n

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Net of  money market mutual  fund holdings  of  these items.
- 2. Includes money market deposit  accounts.
- 4. Excludes IRA and Keogh  accounts.
- 3. Includes  retail  epurchase  agreements.  All RA and Keogh  accounts  at  commercial r I banks  and thrift  stitutions in are subtracted from small time deposits.
- 5. Net  of  large  denomination time deposits held  by money market  mutual funds,  depository institutions,  S.  government,  and foreign  banks and  official stitutions. U. in
- p preliminary

Monetary data are pre-benchmark. that is. they do  NOT incorporate revisions from the  most recent annual benchmark and seasonal review.

NET  CHANGES IN  SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF  SECURITES 1 Millions f  dollars,  ot  seasonally  djusted o n a

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

(FR) CLASS II-FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Change  from  end-of-period o  end-of-period. t
- 4.  Reflects  et hange  in  edemptions n c r (-) of  Treasury  nd  agency  securities. a
- 2.  Outright ransactions  n  market and with  foreign ccounts. t i a
- 3. Outright  transactions n market and  with foreign  accounts, and  short-term  notes i acquired
- in  xchange  for aturing  bills. e m Excludes maturity  shifts  nd rollovers   maturing  issues. a of
- 5. Includes hange  in Ps c R (+), matched  sale-purchase ansactions and matched  purchase  ale ransactions tr (-), s t (+).
- 6. The levels  f  agency  issues  ere  as ollows: o w f

<!-- missing-text -->