The following PDF document consists of charts and graphs providing visual representation of the economic data and concepts discussed in the transcript.  For an alternative version of this information,

please submit a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request or you may contact the FOI office at 202-452-

3684 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. eastern time.

APPENDIX

Material used by Mr. Fisher in his presentation

3-Month Deposit Rates

<!-- missing-text -->

STANDBY FINANCING FACILITY

AUCTION RESULTS

Three of five on overnight repurchase agreements Dec 'Strip; Dec 30th Strip; and Jan 6th Strip options strips 23rd _

<!-- missing-text -->

Total issuance:

Dec Strip: 23rd

$ 113.85 billion

Dec 30th Strip:

222.95 billion

Jan 6th Strip:

144.00 billion

Auctions held: (18t) Nov. 10, (Sth) Nov. 17; (6th) Nov. 23; (7th) Dec. 1 (4th

Cumulative Reserve Drain from Currency in Circulation**

"Currency in Circulation is all currency held outside the Fed and the Treasury by the public and banks both domestic and foreign. Actual data through 12/20

<!-- missing-text -->

New York Staff Free Reserves Estimates Daily Levels as of 12/20/99

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

DAILY FEDERAL FUNDS TRADING RANGE, EFFECTIVE RATE &amp; +/-ONE STANDARD DEVIATION

<!-- missing-text -->

APPENDIX 2

Alternative Drafts for Press Release

1. Symmetry:

The Federal Open Market Committee made no change today in its target for the federal funds rate.

Based on the available evidence, however, the Committee remains concerned with the possibility that over time increases in demand will continue to exceed the growth in potential supply; even after taking account of the remarkable rise in productivity growth. Such trends could foster inflationary imbalances that would undermine the economy' s exemplary performance.

Nonetheless, in light of market uncertainties associated with the century date change, the Committee decided to adopt a symmetric directive in order to indicate that the focus of policy in the intermeeting must be assuring a smooth transition to the Year 2000. At its next meeting the Committee will assess available information on the likely balance of supply and demand, conditions in financial markets, and the possible need for adjustment in the stance of policy to contain inflationary pressures. period

[Separately, the Committee indicated that it plans in January to make a public announcement about future adjustments to its disclosure policy and the so-called 'bias' adjustment.]

2. Asymmetry:

The Federal Market Committee made no change today in its target for the federal funds rate. Open

Based on the available evidence, however, the Committee remains concerned with the possibility that over time increases in demand will continue to exceed the growth in potential supply; even after taking account of the remarkable rise in productivity growth. Such trends could foster inflationary imbalances that would undermine the economy' s exemplary performance. While these concerns prompted the Committee to adopt an asymmetric directive it agreed that market uncertainties associated with the century date change require that the focus of policy in the intermeeting must be to assure a smooth transition to the Year 2000. today , period

[Separately; the Committee indicated that it plans in January to make a public announcement about future adjustments to its disclosure policy and the so-called "bias' adjustment.]