APPENDIX

Mr. Chairman:

I will be referring to  the four pages of  color charts distributed to  the Committee this morning.

As  you can see on  the first page, U.S. short-term, forward interest rates rose steadily following your last meeting but then began to  decline in  early September, particularly following the releases of  the  August employment report, CPI and retail sales, before jumping up  a  bit last week.

German forward rates have declined slightly since the Bundesbank lowered its repo rate by  30  basis points to 3 percent on  August 22nd. Japanese forward rates have also declined since your last meeting, moving sharply on  the release of the Bank of Japan's Tankan survey which reported a  surprising decline in  the manufacturing index. Market participants now  expect both the Bundesbank and the  Bank of  Japan to  be very  much on  hold for the months ahead.

Turning to the second page, in  light of these shifts in forward rates, it is not so surprising that Japanese and  German bond markets outperformed our  own  over the period, although the U.S. bond market did have a  bit of a  rally in  early September.

More intriguing is the consistency with which German and U.S. equity markets rallied together in  early September, as  the German economy came to  be  perceived as somewhat stronger than feared and the U.S. economy as somewhat less strong than feared.

Turning to  the third page, in  September the dollar has rallied back almost to  the levels it had reached in  early July. In looking at  these recent movements, however, I  feel the burden of too many, rather than too few, explanations. Thus, it's harder to find a  convincing, small number of  discrete events to plot on  these charts.

Broadly speaking, heightened market expectations for a firming in  rates by  the Committee helped underpin the dollar, particularly against the  yen --  as  market participants unwound their expectations for the Bank of  Japan to follow any increase in rates by  the Committee. In  last ten days of August, ten-year differentials widened further in the dollar's favor by  over 20 basis points against Germany and over 50 basis points against Japan.

However, I  think the proximate cause of the dollar's sharp move up, particularly against the  mark, was  caused by  a  rush to cover short dollar positions that had  built up  in  anticipation that the  mark would strengthen in  mid-September on  the release of a  French budget that would fail plausibly to  meet the Maastrict criteria. Indeed, both the Bundesbank and  the Bank of France were quite concerned about this risk.

In  the event, however, the French budget failed to  generate any immediate political or  market controversy and  anxiety about the challenges of meeting the  Maastrict criteria have receded quite quickly. Thus, market participants who  had  positioned themselves for an  appreciation of the mark, instead saw rallies in the U.S. bond and  equity markets and  they  moved quickly to  cover their short dollar positions, jolting the  dollar up  through 1.50 against the  mark and 110 against the yen.

While the larger-than-expected U.S. trade deficit last week caused only a brief sell-off in  the dollar, market participants are now  more skeptical that the trade story will remain supportive for the dollar going forward.

Despite the sharp movements in  the dollar, volatility on currency options has remained at quite low  levels.

Turning to the fourth page, market expectations for the outcome of this meeting have shifted back and forth sharply.

Following your last meeting, the  October Fed Funds futures contract implied a  40 percent probability of  a  25 basis point tightening at this meeting. Expressed in  terms of such a quarter-point move, this shot up  to  a  90  percent probability following the publication of the September 3rd  Wall Street Journal article, which suggested some prospect of a  50 basis point hike, then declined back to  around a  45 percent probability after the release of the  August employment, price and  retail sales figures, before jumping back up  to  almost a  70 percent probability after the release of the Reuters "discount rate" story last week.

These movements have stimulated some volatility in  the spread between the 2-year note and the Committee's Fed Funds target rate, although this has been roughly comparable to  the movements which took place in  July. Implied volatility on options on  the 2-year and 30-year futures contracts have recently begun to  creep up  but, again, are still roughly within the ranges seen during July.

Turning to  domestic operations, reserve shortages were accentuated by  seasonal currency growth and  the higher, targeted Treasury balance around the  mid-September tax date. A  few days are worthy of  note.

On  Tuesday, September 3rd, pressures in  the funding market were the result of the combination of the settlement of the Treasury's 2-  and 5-year notes, a  $30 billion cash management bill, a  Social Security payment date and  other heavy corporate payment flows. Although the Desk had  put a  considerable amount of reserves in the system, the funds rate traded as high as 10 percent and the effective rate on  the day  was 6 percent.

On  Wednesday, September 4th, the funds rate briefly traded at 20  percent. This did  not appear to  be the result of a  followthrough from the  previous day  but  was the result of two  banks unexpectedly finding themselves short at  the very end  of the day. Funds had  been trading quite comfortably on  the 4th  and, even including the trades conducted by  these two institutions, the daily effective rate was only 5.35 percent.

Last week we  had a  miss in  our estimate of the Treasury balance, which left $3  billion more reserves in  the banking system than we intended which contributed to softness in  the funds rate last week. Unfortunately, misses of this size are not uncommon around corporate tax payment dates.

Notwithstanding a  few interesting days and some instances of elevated end-of-day rates, since your last meeting the effective Fed Funds rates has average 5.25 percent.

Mr. Chairman, we  had  no  foreign exchange interventions during the period. I will need the Committee's ratification of the Desk's domestic operations which have been reported to  you in greater detail in  the Desk's Weekly and Pre-FOMC reports.

Forward Rate Agreements

m

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

German

Q2

GDP

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Probability   September of 25 basis  point ate  hike r Percent Implied by October Fed Funds Futures (CBOT)

2

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

FOMC BRIEFING

The data received in  an interval between Committee meetings rarely, if ever, provide an  entirely coherent and  persuasive indication of  where the economy is  headed. That said, the recent period may still be  remarkable for its statistical muddle. Indeed, the latest Greenbook may have seemed to  you to  be  a  story of  why every other number released since the twentieth of  August should not be believed.

I want to review just briefly a  few  of  the anomalies we've identified. First, on  the labor front, the plunge of  the unemployment rate in  August to 5.1 percent seems questionable, and  probably reflects in  part seasonal adjustment problems. We're anticipating that there will be at least some retracement in  September, involving another bounce back up in  the  participation rate. Labor demand clearly has been strong, as indicated by  the employment and initial claims figures, but not so robust as to  be able to  chop three-tenths off the jobless rate this summer.

On the spending side, we're cautioning against reading too much into the reported net decline in  retail sales from May to August. We're predicting that there will be some upward revision or a  nearterm resurgence in sales, given our assessment of  the demand trends that should be associated with the strong income and  wealth and buoyant sentiment we've seen lately.

We also told  you in  the Greenbook that the recent data on nonresidential construction contracts seemed oddly weak, against the backdrop of a  reported firming of the commercial real estate market; we  therefore predicted that actual building activity would hold up

better than the trend in  contracts suggested. Since the Greenbook, we've received a  report on  contracts showing upward revisions to earlier months and  a big jump in  August, so  we feel our forecast is on firmer ground now.

On the other hand, we  told  you that you shouldn't believe that sales of  new  homes soared in  July, as initially reported, and that housing demand actually has been tapering gradually since the spring. Now, I also have to tell you  to  discount heavily the August figures on  housing starts, which came out last Thursday and showed a spurt in single-family units. It looks to  us like the high starts figure last month reflected a  combination of  statistical noise and perhaps an  unusually quick drawdown of  permits. But, that said, it may  well be that homebuilding has held up  better than we  judged.

We told  you that the BEA's figures on  federal purchases seem to  be fouled up, but that it doesn't matter for the near-term projection because they will come up  with sensible "best-change" estimates even if the levels are wrong. Admittedly, not a very satisfying story, but potentially an important one--as demonstrated by the surprises in  recent GDP  numbers.

We told  you that the July figures on international trade were misleading, because of seasonal adjustment problems, one-time payments related to the Olympics, and the usual noise in  the monthly data. Net exports really aren't weakening that much.

And, finally, we indicated that you should believe that wage inflation is on  the upswing, as underscored by  the August report on average hourly earnings; however, at the same time, we advised you to resist the temptation to extrapolate the good news on  price trends in the subdued August PPI and  CPI  numbers.

So, where does this all leave us?

Well, first, we're pretty sure that the  economy is on  a  solid growth path, with little risk of recession or  even seriously subpar growth in  the near term--at least absent some significant exogenous shock. The economy appears to  be  enjoying ample liquidity under the current monetary policy settings, and fiscal policy probably is exerting only a  modest degree of  restraint on  demand. As  I've suggested, there are enough positives in the consumer sector currently to counterbalance any concerns related to debt and  delinquency problems. Manufacturers' order books indicate favorable prospects for capital goods production for at least a  while. Although we still think that homebuilding is peaking, the latest data suggest the improbability of  a  marked weakening in  the absence of  an  appreciable further rise in  mortgage rates. And, though the July trade figures reinforce our sense that net exports are still on  a  downward path, this doesn't appear likely to  be  an  overwhelming drag on  activity.

All this leads us to  the prediction that growth will be  more moderate over coming quarters, but still sufficient to hold resource utilization in  the recent high range. We  are in the  mainstream of forecasters in this regard: Our 2.1 percent 1997 GDP  projection is just a  tenth above the early September Blue Chip consensus. Looking at the two wings of  the Blue Chip forecast distribution, I'd  have to say that I'm  somewhat more impressed by  the arguments for greater growth than we've projected in  the next few quarters. Perhaps this is just because we're coming off a  strong period--which is a psychological trap one needs to avoid. But, I do  worry, for example, that housing starts and the stock market are telling us that higher bond yields are not biting into final demand even to  the  moderate degree we  think, and  that stronger sales could in turn prompt businesses to  build inventories more aggressively.

In  the end, I  don't think the probability distribution around our growth forecast is severely skewed, but you'll undoubtedly want to assess that distribution in the  context of the inflation implications of  a  deviation from the predicted track. We  still hold with some conviction the view that the underlying trend of inflation will be deteriorating in  the  period ahead unless growth of  aggregate demand slows enough to lessen significantly the  pressures on  resources-especially labor.

We find the evidence that wages are rising more rapidly quite persuasive. The evidence on  total compensation is less persuasive statistically, but it is there. And,  whatever the magnitude of  the minimum wage effect, its sign is clearly positive in  the short run.

The big  question is whether the trend of  prices must follow the projected acceleration of compensation. One might argue about the use of the word "must," but we  believe that the answer is "yes, at least eventually." Granted that businesses are still talking about competition depriving them of pricing leverage, but--absent favorable supply shocks--it's not obvious what in  the outlook for activity and capacity growth would lead one to think that price markups would be allowed to erode continuously. At some point, it seems more likely that a  broadly experienced cost increase--like that for labor--would be  associated with some rise in  prices. Thus, despite the adjustments we've made in  response to the recent good news on  the core CPI, we remain comfortable with our forecast of an  uptilt in  the  underlying trend of inflation. The only  'question is  when and how  much. We've taken our  best shot on that score. Again, you'll have to  make your own assessment of how to  deal with the uncertainty surrounding our forecast in  the context of  your policy objectives.

FOMC Briefing Donald L. Kohn

The Committee is facing today the same issue, with many of  the same pros and cons, as it has faced for the last several meetings. As one market letter recently noted, the data released over the intermeeting period have bolstered the arguments both for standing pat and for tightening.

On the one hand, prices have remained surprisingly quiescent, and one key element of final demand--consumption spending--has softened appreciably. With no signs in  product markets that pressures on resources are pervasive, and with demand slowing, there still is some chance that inflation may be contained without a policy adjustment. If so, standing pat will have allowed the economy to produce at  a higher level than if the Committee had tightened. Moreover, even if  inflation emerges, it should do so slowly and gradually from a  base that is lower than had been expected by many, restraining the associated uptick in inflation expectations. The Committee may  view these circumstances as reducing the potential risks and costs of  waiting a  while longer to assess the situation.

On the other hand, the revision to second-quarter GDP, the unemployment rate, and the behavior of  wages all suggest that the economy more likely is producing beyond its potential. Moreover, housing starts and initial claims

raise questions about whether demand is slowing sufficiently to take the pressure off resources. This situation, which is reflected in the upward tilt to inflation in the Greenbook makes it  more likely that at some point you will have to tighten to  hold inflation near its current rate. Markets themselves have built in a slight firming by early next year--though this may  be colored as much by  their reading about your intentions as by their judgment of  what would be necessary to achieve your goal. They may  also be building in your usual response to strong economic growth. Output has expanded faster than potential for two and perhaps three quarters, and faster than expected. It would be  unusual-inconsistent, for example, with the Taylor rule--for the Committee not to tighten at some point in these circumstances, unless inflation were receding.

One question is what sort of  indicators, in advance of  actual inflation itself, might prompt a judgment--now or in the future--that tightening had become necessary. In the past couple of  years we have learned--or relearned--that some of the more problematic indicators are those purporting to measure the degree of slack in the economy. One set of problems stems, of course, from the difficulty in estimating the level of sustainable output or the NAIRU. Moreover, the Federal Reserve has made a  point of saying that it doesn't arbitrarily hold down growth or target a  particular level of output or unemployment, but instead looks for signs of

emerging price pressures. While those signs are in  short supply to date, output appreciably beyond estimated potential--however broad the range of  uncertainty around that estimate--poses a significant risk of  inflation later strengthening. Consequently, even without an overt acceleration in prices, if output continues to run well above estimated potential, and especially if resource utilization rises further, the Committee may  need to consider whether it wants more assurance that policy is not promoting an eventual pickup in inflation.

Any such judgment can't be divorced from indicators of  wage and price developments. But a  number of aspects of the current situation makes interpreting these data complex as  well. For one, while favorable supply developments-perhaps related to job insecurity or  decelerating medical costs--are undoubtedly contributing to the surprisingly damped increases in compensation and prices, we should not dismiss the possibility that part of this good behavior is a reflection of the credibility of low inflation itself. That is, expectations that low inflation will continue--built on the experience of recent years and evident in survey results--may be providing considerable inertia to the inflation process. The risk is that policymakers mistakenly attribute the sluggish response of inflation to high output entirely to persisting favorable supply conditions. Attempts to stimulate aggregate demand to utilize the

seemingly more ample aggregate supply will be  unsuccessful over time and only result in  an eventual deterioration in inflation and inflation expectations.

A second complexity in interpreting wage and price indicators is the nature of the inflation problem that may be emerging. The circumstances facing the Committee in this expansion may be somewhat different than those in some previous inflation cycles. Pressures seem more evident in labor than product markets. In part because of  the sizeable investment in capital equipment, capacity utilization has dropped from its recent peak, but the unemployment rate is at a  new low for this cycle. Continuing slack in foreign industrial economies, damping inflation abroad and stimulating foreign competition with U.S. manufacturers, may also be alleviating pressures in product markets. In these circumstances, any pickup in inflation should be slow and perhaps delayed. Nonetheless, the Committee may not be able to take very much comfort from the absence of  such traditional early indicators of  price pressures as rising commodity and intermediate materials prices, or slower supplier deliveries. Instead, in the staff forecast, tightness in the labor market gradually puts pressures on costs, feeding through over time into rising rates of increase in prices.

I've already noted the key role of  damped expectations holding down inflation. In that regard, the Committee may want to be alert to signs in financial and related

markets that those expectations are beginning to drift higher after a  long period of stability. In the past, the Committee looked at movements in the dollar, long-term interest rates and commodity prices among other variables for clues in  this regard. It is important to  view these and other financial indicators in combination--especially how they react to incoming news on the economy or prices. A rise in long-term rates by itself may not indicate increasing inflation expectations, but rather a  judgment that higher real rates over the next few  years will be required to hold the economy close to potential. But a  rise in rates associated with a  steady or declining dollar, other things equal, for example, might be a  warning that inflation expectations, not expected real rates, were being revised higher. So far this year, a  dollar on the firm side has tended to confirm that the rise in long-term rates since January likely has been mainly real. To be sure, price or rate changes in financial markets may not be easily parsed into various types of expectations or readily explainable as an appropriate response to news. The amazing resilience of the stock market this year suggests a  note of  caution in expecting to extract rational views from the market. Moreover, financial market responses may not be mirrored in attitudes in labor and product markets. It seems unlikely that price and  wage setters react as strongly or to the same types of information that affect financial markets. But financial market reactions themselves can create difficulties for the Committee and at times they may foreshadow more far-reaching changes in attitudes.

For flows in financial markets, with levels of interest rates not expected to move much on balance, the staff sees growth of broad money and credit going forward about in line with the projected expansion of  nominal spending. The linkage is far from tight, despite the better behavior of  M2 demand of  late. But since our projections embody a  slight upward tilt to inflation, substantially more rapid money and credit growth on  a  persistent basis might be another warning sign of significant inflation pressures.

If, at this meeting or some time in the future, you do raise the funds rate, the odds are high that other interest rates will rise as well. How  much is a  more difficult call.

Some have argued in the past that a  firm show of resolve by the Federal Reserve will damp inflation expectations enough to offset higher real rates and reduce longterm interest rates. We have had, unfortunately, over the intermeeting period a  couple of experiments in  which markets learned something about purported Federal Reserve intentions with respect to policy actions, divorced from news about the economy or prices. In these cases, information that the Federal Reserve might tighten caused interest rates across

the maturity spectrum to increase, shifting up forward rates far into the future.

In  addition, over the last decade, long-term rates have in fact tended to move considerably more in response to policy actions that represented a  change in direction than to those that kept rates going in  the same direction--a tendency that has concerned some of  you in the current situation.

Thus, markets--equally as  well as debt--are likely to respond substantially to a  tightening, even if such action is forecast by the majority of  analysts and mostly priced into future rates. Such a  reaction would reflect a response to news not only about the level of  short-term rates, but also about your assessment of the economic risks. Nonetheless, as we  noted in the bluebook, much market commentary does seem to have bought onto the idea that any change in policy direction need not be the start of a  long string of actions in the same direction. In part, this reflects the effect of some of the incoming data, which have been read as indicating that inflation pressures will not be so intense as to require a  major policy adjustment. In addition, the minutes of your meetings have noted that many Committee members share the view that policy is not so tilted to the accommodative side as to suggest the need for much adjustment. As a  consequence, if the Committee were to tighten, market reaction is likely to be smaller than might

be inferred from previous changes in policy direction. The wording of the announcement could improve the chances that the market would see the tightening as limited in scope.