The following PDF document consists of charts and graphs providing visual representation of the economic data and concepts discussed in the transcript.  For an alternative version of this information,

please submit a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request or you may contact the FOI office at 202-452-

3684 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. eastern time.

APPENDIX

Material used by Mr. Fisher in his presentation

3-Month Deposit Rates

Current Euro-Deposit Rate and Rates Implied by_Traded Forward Rate Agreements

July 1, 1998 13, 1999 May

<!-- missing-text -->

Basis Point Change in Three Month Deposit Rates

<!-- missing-text -->

US Treasury Yields 1,1997 to 14, 1999 May May

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Years to Maturity

DAILY FEDERAL FUNDS

<!-- missing-text -->

1 4 1 1

Page 5

<!-- missing-text -->

There is an increased likelihood, later in the year, of the Desk on both sides of the market, alternately and draining reserves. being adding

- The Special Lending Facility; if used as intended, will provide a means for the System's balance sheet to expand as we lend to perceived to be less well prepared that are losing deposits to either the withdrawal of notes or
- The banks may not be comfortable either holding high levels of excess reserves Or recycling deposits back to 'lesser' credits.
- This could lead to tiering in the funds markets, with the System acting as intermediary: adding reserves to 'small? banks; draining from banks. slarge
- Thus; the System's balance sheet may be expanding through use of the Special Lending Facility;, as well as through the Desk?s outright operations and term repo operations (in response to an overall increase of notes in circulation)longer -
- The Desk is likely to fine tune reserves with more frequently alternating use of short-term repos and matched-sales, adding or draining as appropriate.
- As year-end approaches, if there appears to be a developing (6 'scarcity of collateral' as some the Desk may intentionally oversupply reserves , early on with term repos, so that we can then fine tune total reserves through matched-sale draining operations; where we provide the collateral. fear,

Some consideration is given to the need for &lt;late day? operations, after the regular 3 p.m. close of the securities wire: being

- To drain reserves, through (( on-uS matched sales, where we would find a means of crediting the collateral to the dealers after the normal 3 p.m. close:
- To add reserves, through use of tripartite custodians; who would hold the collateral for us.
- Use of a tripartite custodian might also facilitate our acceptance of other forms of collateral (that the Desk's systems cannot now handle).

2 1 1

<!-- missing-text -->