APPENDIX

Mr. Chairman:

I will be referring to  the two pages of color charts distributed this morning.

Expected short-term rates in  the U.S., Germany and Japan have all declined since your last meeting, as you  can see in the three panels of forward rate agreements. U.S. and  German forward rates peaked at the time of  the release of the June employment data, indicated by  the 2nd  vertical line, shortly after the Committee's last meeting, and  are now  trading well below their June and July highs. Japanese expected short-term rates peaked about a  week later, around the time of the sharp sell-off in equities and the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, indicated by  the 3rd and 4th  numbered lines, but have not quite moved below their levels of early June. These seemingly modest changes in expected short-term rates are in  contrast to the sharper movements in  asset prices, depicted on  the second page of  charts.

In  terms of total returns, U.S. and  German bond markets have had quite a  rally from their June and  July levels, while the Japanese bond market has just barely managed to  move into positive territory. Similarly, U.S. and  German equity markets have recovered most of their July losses, while the Japanese TOPIX index is still off considerably from its June levels.

The dollar dropped sharply in  mid-July against both the mark and the yen, and currency option volatilities jumped up, at  the time of the steepest decline in  equities, as indicated in  the bottom two panels and  the 3rd  numbered line. However, the

dollar's sell-off was short-lived, seeming to reflect an  abrupt closing out of  a  limited number of long-dollar positions amidst the heightened uncertainty associated with the sharp equity declines. Since then, the dollar has traded sideways and currency option volatilities have traded back down to  their previous, low levels.

Looking back over these forward rate and  price movements, I am  struck by  three things.

First, the poor performance of both Japanese bond and equity markets, relative to  Germany and the U.S., is quite apparent but, given the roughly similar movements in short-term forward rates, is not necessarily easy to  explain. With nominal interest rates so low  and the Bank of Japan widely expected to raise rates at some point in  the coming months, there is little room for Japanese government bonds to  rally. Thus, for  JGBs to  eke out any  gain during the period may  be  more noteworthy than their relative performance against Treasuries and  bunds. In  discussing Japanese equities, market participants note that new issuance, particularly by  Japanese banks raising equity capital, may  be weighing on  the market. A  somewhat weaker dollar against the  yen is also thought to  weigh on  Japanese equity values.

But instead of focusing on  the Japanese markets' weaker performance, it  may be that U.S. and  German asset prices are a little topish. Indeed, the coincident rally in these markets in late July is another striking feature of the  period.

U.S. equity and  bond markets both took comfort from the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony --  each one focusing on  a slightly different time horizon and hearing slightly different messages. The equity market was relieved to  hear that an immediate increase in  rates was not a  foregone conclusion. The

bond market was cheered to  hear the Chairman say  both that the Committee was especially vigilant and that there was still the possibility of a  slowing of the economy in  the second half of the year. Thus, when the data releases in  early August provided little evidence of rising wage and  price pressures and some evidence of slower activity, bond market participants short their duration targets rushed to  catch up  with those --  fewer, braver souls --  who had  been long bonds since late June.

It's hard for me  to see Treasuries rallying further from these levels without the market having greater confidence that the economy is likely to  be operating at or  below potential in the months ahead. For example, last week's jumpy reaction to  the CPI report indicated to  me  that there are some market participants holding long positions who may  not yet  be  entirely comfortable with them. Moreover, with the 30-year bond yield around 6.8 percent, the  market is  trading at levels previously seen in  March and  April when the idea that the Committee's next move would be a  tightening had not yet been completely accepted.

Two factors seem to  cut the other way: U.S. fiscal performance this year is turning out to  be  better than market participants expected and  the inflation performance, so  far this year, is also better than many would have predicted given the strength of the economy to  date.

The level of implied volatility on  options on  the September Treasury futures contract is notably lower in the last few  days [7.64 vs. around 10]. Thus, whatever unease I  may  have about the bond market's current pricing, options market participants seem to  be less anxious now than they have been.

German asset prices benefitted from flows out of  higheryielding European markets as  prospects for an  easy route to

European monetary union have begun to fade. As  the mark began to firm and  bund yields moved lower, the market got the sense that a modest reduction in  the Bundesbank's repo rate was --  once again --  a  possibility. This, in  turn, further supported German asset prices.

The third feature of the period that I find noteworthy is the dog  that did  not  bark: the relative tranquility of the dollar in the last few  weeks, after its abrupt drop in  mid-July. With short-term interest expectations in  Germany, Japan and the  U.S. all moving in  the same direction, but with  U.S. forward rates having had  a  bit more of step-down, a  slightly lower but still stable dollar is not much of a  surprise.

However, the dollar's decline did  not appear to have been triggered by  shifts in interest rate expectations but, rather, by the sharp declines in  U.S. equity values. With habit an  often underestimated variable in  market behavior, I think this leaves the dollar vulnerable, in  the short run, to  any further correction in  equity values. Given the  off-again, on-again expectations for a  reduction in  the Bundesbank's repo rate, the dollar may  also be  vulnerable if the Bundesbank once again disappoints the recently built-up expectations for lower rates.

In  domestic money markets, the Desk added reserves through both temporary and  permanent open market operations.

At the end  of July and into the first week of August, the Fed Funds market exhibited a  firmness which appeared to  be associated initially with a  forecast miss on  our  part but then with heightened demand for financing at the general collateral rate in  the repurchase market coincident with the month-end, a maintenance-period settlement day, and the  settlement of the Treasury's auctions. While the cause-effect relationship between

the RP  and Fed Funds market in  this episode has been hard to  pin down, there was no  denying the fact of a  persistently firm funds rate. The Desk responded by  providing substantially more in excess reserves at the start of the August 14th period than normal and, within a  couple of  days, the funds rate was trading backdown around its target.

The Desk purchased $4.1 billion in  coupon securities in outright operations to  meet large current and  prospective reserve needs. Reserve needs are expected to continue to grow in September and we  may  want to  make a  further permanent injection of reserves before the Committee's next meeting.

Let me  note that members of the Committee should have received, in just the last day  or  two, a  binder of  materials to serve as  background for  a  Committee discussion of the maturity structure and  management of the SOMA  portfolio which is tentatively planned for the Committee's next meeting.

Mr. Chairman, I will need the Committee's ratification of the Desk's domestic operations during the  period. We  had  no foreign exchange operations. I would be  happy to  answer any questions.

US Forward  Rate Agreements*

<!-- missing-text -->

German Forward  Rate Agreements*

<!-- missing-text -->

Japanese  Forward Rate Agreements*

<!-- missing-text -->

*A forward  rate  agreement  (FRA) is  a  contract n  the  eurocurrency  markets in  which one party romises another  to  pay  a specific  nterest i p i rate  on a  deposit f pecified  mount, currency,  nd term beginning  at  a specified  ate  in  the  future. or example, a 9x12 FRA  refers o o s a a d F t the  yield  n  a three-month  deposit  with   value  date  nine  months  hence and a maturity  ate  twelve  months hence. o a d

- 1. July 2-3 FOMC meeting
- 4. Humphrey-Hawkins Testimony (1st  day)
- 2.  June Employment Report
- 3. Drop of 2.53% in S&amp;amp;P
- 5. Bundesbank  Leaves Rates Unchanged  at  Council  Meeting
- 6. July  Employment Report

10 Year Government  Bonds Total  Returns in  Local  Currencies* (re-indexed o  June t 3,  1996)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Percent

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. uly J 2-3 FOMC meeting
- 4. Humphrey-Hawkins Testimony (1st  day)
- 2.  June Employment Report
- 3.  Drop of  2.53%  in  S&amp;amp;P
- 5. Bundesbank  Leaves Rates Unchanged at  Council  Meeting
- 6. July  Employment Report

FOMC Presentation Charles iegman S August  20, 1996

The Commerce  Department  this  orning  released  ata  for .S. trade n  goods  and  services m d U i for une. The deficit   June  narrowed  to  $8.1  billion,  d  the  deficit   May  was revised  own  by J in an in d $0.3  billion   $10.5 billion.  mports f  goods  and services  eclined  ore than  3 percent rom a to I o d m f relatively  rong  ay  level; xports dged  down. st M e e

For  the  second  quarter, e eficit   goods  and services  idened to  a $113 billion nual  rate th d in w an from a $97.5  billion te n  the  first arter. ra i qu

In  the  Greenbook,  the  staff timated   somewhat larger  eficit r une  and the  second es a d fo J quarter.  preliminary  ssessment f  the  new trade ata  would suggest hat he  contribution  om net A a o d t t fr exports o  GDP  growth  in  the  second  quarter  as about  0.4  percentage  oints ess egative  han  was t w p l n t projected  n  the  Greenbook,  with  nearly ll f  the  revision  ssociated  ith  lower  imports.  As a result, i a o a w second-quarter  eal DP r G would now  show about  a 4 percent nnual  growth  rate ompared with  the a c 3.7  percent ate hown in  the  Greenbook,  approaching he  BEA's advance  number for econd-quarter r s t s real DP  growth. G

On foreign  xchange  markets, he  dollar  dged up following he  release  f  the  June  trade ata. e t e t o d

Michael J. Prell August 20, 1996

FOMC BRIEFING

I'll be brief this morning. Charles has wrapped up  what we know about the second-quarter GDP accounting, and I  really don't have much to add to  what you've already read in the Greenbook regarding our assessment of  the outlook.

Apart from the trade data, the only major statistical indicator that has come out since we finalized our forecast was July housing starts and building permits. In the key single-family sector, starts fell substantially last month, to a  level that is a  tad below our predicted third-quarter pace; permits slipped for the third consecutive month. Overall, the report supplied the evidence we  were looking for that residential construction is indeed weakening. I might note that the partial results of  the August Michigan survey of consumer sentiment, which also were released on  Friday, showed that people still hold predominantly favorable views of  homebuying conditions, with prevailing interest rates actually seen as a  positive factor. We'd think, though, that the large number of  home purchases through the spring exhausted some of  the more urgent demand and that sales will run lower over the remainder of the year even if  market conditions still seem attractive.

As you know, the Michigan survey also indicated that consumer sentiment in  general remains quite upbeat. Not only are things perceived to  be going well now, but people seem to expect more of the same going forward. Businessmen, too, appear to hold favorable, though not ebullient, views of  the outlook at  this time. And Wall Street seems to think things are going just swimmingly.

Based on  that picture, it might be  tempting to adjourn the meeting now and enjoy the rest of  the summer along with everyone else. However, ever the wet blanket at the office party. I'll mention a couple of  potential problems.

First, there's more evidence now  that the inflationary cycle has started to turn upward. The key evidence is, of  course, the ECI report for June. There's enough noise in  this series that one must be careful not to read too  much into the numbers. But the acceleration of  wages in the first half, which lifted the rate of  increase in total compensation, is a  signal that's difficult to ignore--especially when it  meshes so nicely with the widespread anecdotal reports of  tight labor markets and increased wage pressures. And the first installment of  the big increase in the minimum wage is looming just ahead.

Of  course, it's arguable that prices need not follow a  rise in  compensation step for step. And our forecast does anticipate some compression of  profit margins. However, absent a  commensurate acceleration of  productivity, the labor cost pressures are likely to show through eventually. And there simply isn't any statistical evidence to suggest that productivity is taking off. If anything, the recent trends have been disappointing--and our forecast could be said to be  optimistic in  looking for some improvement in  productivity performance in coming quarters, especially when qualified labor is reportedly in such short supply.

Be that as it may, the pickup in  inflation we've projected is rather mild, producing CPI increases just a  little above 3  percent this year and next. Which brings me to  the other possible problem: namely, that the prediction of  so limited a  deterioration in  wage and price trends is contingent on  a  prompt moderation of  aggregate demand that is not yet fully in  evidence. To be  sure, there are hints. The

decline in  housing starts clearly is a  step in  that direction. And while there's talk of  a  pickup in retail activity in  August, the sluggishness of  sales on  balance in  June and July suggests that consumer spending still will be up less this quarter than last.

The one seemingly contrary indicator is the recent run of low readings on  initial claims for unemployment insurance. Although there's reason to believe that changes in seasonal layoff patterns accounted for the sharp drop in adjusted claims in  the latter half of July, that rationale is becoming less compelling as  we  move through August. Under the circumstances, one can't rule out the possibility that what we've seen is in fact a  sign of  more hiring than is  built into our  forecast.

That said, I  don't want to leave the impression that we  think there's a  major asymmetry to the risks attending our current-quarter GDP forecast. Initial claims can be erratic, and even on a  quarterly basis the relationship of  given levels to  gains in employment or output is not a  tight one. At least at this point, in light of  the other evidence on the pace of activity, we feel it reasonable to discount the signal of  strength coming from the claims figures.

One final thought. We  said very little in  the Greenbook about the possibility of  an  auto strike. There were two reasons: First, we  don't know what's going to  happen. Of  course, that rarely stops us from forecasting. So second, and  more important, is the thought that, if  there is a  strike, the main effect is likely to  be mainly some short-run gyrations in  the data, rather than a meaningful alteration in  the fundamental trends that are most relevant to your monetary policy decision.

Mr. Chairman. I'll stop here and invite any questions you and your colleagues might have for us.

FOMC Briefing

Donald L.  Kohn

As at  your  last  eeting, he  issue or he  Committee would seem to m t f t be whether  to  raise  he  funds  rate. ast  time, everal  f  you framed  your t L s o comments around  two key  questions  earing n this ecision: ne, would b o d O the  economy slow promptly  enough to  the  growth  of  its otential   that p so resource tilization ld stabilize    around  recent evels?  Two, would u wou at l something  close o  the  current  evel f  resource tilization  consistent t l o u be with  holding he  line n inflation? t o

As the  Greenbook noted, he  evidence  becoming available  ince he t s t last  eeting  on these ssues s  mixed. Most of  the  real ide ata  point o  a m i i s d t slowing  in  the  expansion,  hough  whether  it ill e sufficient    forestall t w b to further  ncreases  n  resource tilization ains  an open question. owi i u rem H ever, s Mike discussed,the  mpensation  data  have  seemed to  confirm  that a co an acceleration  s  begun--mostly  n  association th  unemployment rates ha i wi a shade  above those revailing w or  in  the  staff  orecast--and  e  politip no f th cal  process as  thrown  an adverse upply  shock  into he  macroeconomic h s t mix by raising  he  minimum  wage.  The higher inimum  wage is, o  be t m t

sure,   change  in  the  level f  compensation n  the  first stance, t  it a o i in bu would tend  to  raise  he  inflation  te s  employers  passed  it hrough o t ra a t t output rices  nd workers  in  turn ttempted o  maintain he  level f  their p a a t t o real ages. w

Nonetheless,  n  the  financial rkets, oncern  about  inflation  esi ma c pr sures  has  receded.  Markets  do not  have  a tightening ilt  n  for his bu i t meeting, nd the  structure   futures  ates  nd the  yield urve  through  the a of r a c longer aturities,  ter  ough  allowance or  usual erm  premiums,  suggest m af r f t that arket  participants  spect hat t  most  only  a small  policy irming m su t a f will e needed  to  contain nflation. wever, these orts f  readings ave b i Ho s o h become even more questionable  ver  time  as  an independent ssessment f o a o inflation tential.  arket participants  em increasingly    be shaping po M se to their  valuations  f  the  economic situation rtly  y their  erception  f e o pa b p o your  outlook,  s  well  as  their  eading f  incoming  data nd your  likely a r o a response.  A portion  f  the  bond market  rally  ince id-July eflected eir o s m r th belief  fter  he  Humphrey-Hawkins  hearings hat ou did  not  see  the a t t y inflation  reat  s  quite s  pressing  s  they  once  thought ou did. th a a a y

Still,  her inancial rket  indicators so re  consistent th  a ot f ma al a wi policy hat s  not  too  far rom  neutrality. e levels  f  longer-term  eal t i f Th o r rates--as st  one can  judge  them--remain lose o  those hat n average n be c t t o i the  past  15 years ave  been  adequate o  keep  inflation    check.  Even so, h t in real nterest tes  nd  the  dollar  re  a bit ower  than  they  were at he  time i ra a a l t of  your  last  eeting, uggesting  lightly ss estraint   aggregate emand m s s le r on d than  you might  have  anticipated    early uly.  Meanwhile,  credit  ontinues in J c to  be  available   businesses  n terms  that,  f nything,  re  becoming a bit to o i a a more favorable  ver  time.  For  households,  enders  re  reconsidering e o l a th aggressive  ending ostures  hey  had adopted  during  recent ears,  ut  we l p t y b don't ee  evidence  of  a tightening   consumer credit  vailability t ill s of a ha w significantly mp  household  spending.  The slowing  of  money  and debt cri growth  in  recent onths perhaps  offers  ome reassurance  hat  olicy s  not m s t p i so  accommodative as  to  foster  learly  nflationary  lges n  liquidity c i bu i or credit. iewed over  a slightly nger ime  span, rowth  in  broad  measures V lo t g of  money  and credit  as  remained  consistent th  expansion f  nominal h wi o GDP  in  the  4-1/2 o  5  percent ange  of  the  staff recast. t r fo

The staff's  sessment f  the  outlook s  not  far rom that f  the  maras o i f o ket, hough  perhaps  tilted  little  re toward  the  risk  f  greater  nflation. t a mo o i In  the  staff  orecast, terest tes re  somewhat too  low to  hold  the f in ra a economy at  potential,  d the  resulting tput ap,  combined with  the an ou g impulse  from the  minimum  wage,  implies hat ou will ave  to  tighten  t t y h a some point.  The rise  n  inflation   itself uld require  n  increase  n i by wo a i nominal  rates  ust  o  keep  real ates  rom falling d making policy ore j t r f an m accommodative over  time.  And, of  course, eal ates  hemselves ould r r t w have to  be raised  o  stop  the  upward movement  in  inflation,   he  staff's t ift assessment f  macro relationships    about  right.    small  increase  n  real o is A i rates ight  be sufficient   he  Committee were content  o  close he  output m ift t t gap and accept  whatever  rate f  inflation  evailed  hen the  economy o pr w settled ck  down to  potential;  t  the  adjustment  ould take  some time, ba bu w implying  an inflation  te hat robably  leveled  ut  noticeably  igher han ra t p o h t recent xperience. n even higher eal  rate or  a time  and some economic e A r f slack ould be required  o  offset  he  impulse  from the  minimum w t t wage if you wanted  inflation,  ter  ising  n  the  near  term, o  come  back  down  and af r i t to  level ut  closer  o  recent utcomes. And, a persistently her eal ate o t o hig r r

would be  needed  to  put  inflation   a track  oward  price tability  thout on t s wi relying  n unforeseen upply  or  demand shocks.  In  terms  of  order f o s o magnitude, he  Taylor  rule alculations    the  Financial  ndicator  ackage t c in I p suggest  rise  n  the  funds  rate o  the  neighborhood f  6 percent y late a i t o b next  year  if utput nd  prices  ollow  the  Greenbook track  o  be consistent o a f t with  your  historical  action  o  incoming  information.  he tighter terre t T al native n  the  Greenbook takes he  funds  rate o  6-1/4 ercent n  1997 to  tilt i t t p i inflation wn  slightly;  ough  inflation  xt  year  would still   above the do th ne be last  ew years, urther  eclines  ould be in  the  offing. f f d w

In  these ircumstances, at are  the  costs nd benefits  rom keeping c wh a f policy  unchanged at  this ime? The clear enefit  s  a higher evel f  output t b i l o for  a period f  ou do not  raise  hort-term  nterest tes  nd it urns ut i y s i ra a t o you do not  need  to  do so  to  achieve our  inflation  jectives.  any  of y ob M you have already iven  a number of  reasons hy  inflation  y  turn ut g w ma o better  han  the  staff pects,  nd with  even  early igns f  price nd cost t ex a s o a pressures  till ted outside f  the  labor arket, he  FOMC s mu o m t may  want to await  more distinct  dications out  the  future ourse f  inflation  fore in ab c o be firming  policy.

But there re  costs o  waiting f nflationary  essures  re  in  fact a t i i pr a intensifying,  if  he  Committee desires  ome assurance hat nflation  ll or t s t i wi tilt wn  over  the  intermediate n. First, flation uld be higher han do ru in wo t the  Committee desired  nd if ustained, kely  ould have its wn output a s li w o cost  over  time.  In  your  discussion   the  last  eeting, embers  generally at m m agreed  that he  economy probably ould operate ore efficiently    lower t w m at rates f  inflation an  had prevailed  n  recent  ears  or  than  now seem o th i y likely  o  prevail  n  the  staff recast er  the  next  few years. t i fo ov

Second,  one benefit  f  forward-looking  olicy s  that,  f uccessful, o p i i s it should  produce  a smoother  path  for utput,  ther hings  qual.  Total uto o t e o put  summed  over  a period f  years  is  probably ot  very  sensitive   the o n to particular  th  chosen  to  get  to  a given  inflation  jective,   least  ithin pa ob at w reasonable  ounds. However, wide variations   output--especially  gthy b in len or  deep corrections   prolonged vershoots  n  the  economy--may be of o i particularly  sruptive d  have  their  wn  costs. di an o

To be sure, ven if he  economic  forces t  work are  something  like e t a those  identified    the  staff recast, th  the  economy  producing nly  a in fo wi o little  yond  its ong-run otential iting  little  nger or onfirmation be l p wa a lo f c

of  the  emergence  of  additional flation  ould  not  add  appreciably  o  the in sh t degree  of  variation   output r  to  output oss rom  higher nflation. in o l f i

But  the  longer ou delay  to  gather ore evidence,  he  greater  he y m t t adjustment  hat ill e required  n  the  economy, if nflation    in  fact t w b i i is picking p. It as such  sluggish  olicy esponses--"too  ttle  o  late"--that u w p r li to characterized licymaking efore  1980,  which tended  to  accentuate  ather po b r than  smooth  business  ycles.  Arguably, ecent hanges  in  financial rc r c ma kets  have  made it ven  more difficult    avoid  falling to his attern. e to in t p The lack  of  a reliable minal  intermediate  ndicator,  ch  as  the  money no i su supply, o  help  signal eeded  changes  in  policy,  long  with  the  increasingly t n a intense  ublic crutiny  f  each  meeting  of  this ommittee,  can contribute p s o C to  policy nertia. i

A  special  ifficulty    this  ime  is  that   firming ould represent d at t a w a change  in  the  direction   policy. n  recent eetings,  everal f  you have of I m s o remarked  that his ituation ans that ou need  to  see  more evidence o t s me y t support olicy irming han  if our  last ction lso ad  been a tightening. p f t y a a h One reason  given  for  setting is igher tandard  s  that arkets  tend  to th h s i m react ore strongly  o  changes  in  policy irection an  to  continued m t d th

adjustments  long  a given  path.  If,  n  the  Committee's iew,  only  a  small a i v adjustment f  financial nditions  s  needed  to  meet its  bjectives,  major o co i o a market  response ould risk vershooting,  ausing he  economy to  become w o c t weaker than  desirable.  uch market  reactions e  based  on their  eadings S ar r of  Committee policy atterns.  rom experience,  arkets  have come to p F m expect  long  strings  f  policy ctions  n  one direction.  he danger  is  that o a i T a self-reinforcing  hanism is  in  place; ommittee concerns bout  market mec C a overreaction  elay  the  turn n  policy nd  that elay  itself  plies he  need d i a d im t for  a  greater  ightening   easing,  ften n  a series  f  actions. f he  next t or o i o I t move is  a tightening,  e  previous tring  f  easings--at   basis oints-th s o 75 p will ave been  the  smallest  tring  n  either  irection nce  1982. From h s i d si more such  experiences,  long  with  Federal eserve  explanations  f  its a R o strategy  nd tactics,  e  market  may come to  recognize  hat id-course a th t m policy orrections,  en shocks  or  surprises e  not  large,  an  be modest c wh ar c and readily  eversed. r