APPENDIX

Mr. Chairman:

Since your last meeting, U.S. interest rates have declined as market participants have unwound their expectations for  any firming in  policy by  the Committee in the near term. While the dollar rose early in the  period even as interest rates began to decline, in  the latter part of  the period the dollar lost most of its recent gains.

Turning to  the color charts distributed this morning:

Short-term, forward dollar interest rates moved persistently lower in  October, particularly following the release of the September non-farm payrolls and then the  third-quarter employment cost index.

German forward rates gently declined early in  the period but, then, the 9 by  12 --  three-month German rates, nine months forward --  started to  back up  in late October after comments by Bundesbank directorium member Issing appeared to  rule out any further easing in  official rates.

Japanese forward rates declined modestly during October but jumped back up last week, after comments by  the  M-O-F's Sakikabara suggested that the Japanese economy was not as  weak as market participants thought. I will return to these comments in a  moment.

Turning to  the second page:

The U.S. bond market rallied sharply, with the 10-year yield starting roughly at parity with its own 100-day moving average at the time of  your last meeting and  then dropping over the period to  more than 40 basis points under its 100-day average.

German and Japanese bond yields also declined but the net changes over the recent period, since your last meeting, are less striking. German 10-year yields traded back and  forth around 6 percent for most of the period, dropping below this level only in the last few  days.

Japanese 10-year bonds rallied sharply following the Japanese election. The dominant assumption in the  market was that the LDP showing in  the Japanese election was only sufficient to ensure that the current macro-economic policy mix  would be continued --  that the consumption tax  would go into effect, that only a  modest supplemental budget would be  approved, and that monetary policy would continue to  be  accommodative --  and that this would bode well for JGBs. Also, weak consumption data, a decline in  the leading indicators, and flat price data suggested the continued presence of some deflationary forces. However, the rally in JGBs was largely reversed following Sakikabara's comments last week.

Turning to the third page, you  can see that the dollar has lost most of its gains since your last meeting.

Immediately after your September meeting, the dollar rose sharply against both the  mark and the  yen. Notwithstanding the Committee's decision to  leave rates unchanged in  September and apparent slowing in  the U.S., foreign exchange market participants appeared to  focus on  the continued prospect for the

U.S. economy to outperform Europe and Japan and, thus, for interest rate differentials to  remain in  the dollar's favor.

The dollar first started coming off, in  mid-October, against the mark --  moving back  below 1.53 and 1.52, after Issings' comments.

However, quite significantly I  think, both dollar-mark and dollar-yen one-month option volatilities spiked higher on  October 29th, the day  of  the release of the ECI.

While the drop in  U.S. interest rates on  this day, and  thus the changed differentials, may  have played some role in  the movement in these volatilities, this was just one of a  number of events that came together on  the 29th.

In  intra-day trading in  Asia --  which you  cannot see on these graphs --  the dollar traded up  almost to 115 against the yen  but then traded down abruptly following an  announcement by the Japanese Ministry of  Trade and Industry of a  larger-thanexpected increase in  industrial production as  well as comments from a  MITI official that exchange rate stability at current levels was desirable and from then-Finance Minister Kubo that current exchange rates reflected fundamentals. These comments led to  an  abrupt selling of a  number of long-dollar positions as traders began to  ask  whether there had  been a  change in  Japanese exchange rate policy.

Also, October 29th was the day  on  which the German economic institutes revised up  modestly their forecasts for next year's German GDP.

With these developments in  the background, as  well as market anxiety over whether there would be  a  change in  U.S. exchange rate policy after our  election, I  think it is easier to understand the impact of Sakikabara's comments last week.

In  a  newspaper interview he  said that the Japanese authorities were not thinking of guiding the  yen any  lower and that, looking at the fundamentals, it appeared that the phase of the one-way correction of the  yen's strength was  coming to  an end. He  added that the market's view of the Japanese economy was overly pessimistic.

Considered in  isolation, Sakikabara's comments seem entirely appropriate and, indeed, the Bank of Japan agrees with the substance of his remarks --  both on  the  yen and  the Japanese economy. However, he was pulling himself back from  months of aggressively talking down the yen and  market participants were quick to  recognize the change. All in  all, the episode seems a particularly good reminder of the risks of excessive oral intervention.

Briefly turning to our  domestic operations, we reached two new lows in operating balances in  the banking system, first of 17.2 billion and  then of 15.8 billion. While on  some low  balance days the funds rate has closed on  the firm side, the effective fed funds rates have remained fairly well behaved as the banks as well as we on  the  Desk appear to  be learning to  adjust to lower balances. During the three maintenance periods completed since your last meeting, the effective fed funds rate has been 5.27 percent, 5.22 percent and 5.30 percent. To  address the growing needs in  the current and  upcoming maintenance periods, we  made outright purchases last week of 6.5 billion in  Treasury bills.

Mr. Chairman, the Desk had no  foreign exchange interventions during the period --  oral or  otherwise.

As  noted in  a memorandum from Ted Truman to the Committee, this is the occasion when I need the Committee's approval to renew for one year, without change, the System's swap arrangements with  our central bank counterparts and the Bank for International Settlements, including our  participation in  the North American Framework Agreement with the Bank of Canada and the Bank of  Mexico.

Thus, I will need two votes: one for the Swap arrangements and  one for the ratification of  our domestic operations. I  would be  happy to answer any  questions.

1

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Sakakibara  Comments

G-3 Bond  Yields  Decline

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

11/11

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Michael J. Prell November 13, 1996

FOMC BRIEFING

The economic data we received during the intermeeting period contained some notable surprises, relative to our prior forecast. In coming to grips with those surprises in  the latest Greenbook, we  had to  make some tough judgment calls.

The first call related to  the prospects for domestic demand in light of the summer weakness in  consumer spending and the simultaneous burst of  inventory investment. It is our view that the marked softening in  spending was a  transitory phenomenon--perhaps not even totally a  genuine one, given the limited reliability of  the data. But even taking the numbers at face value, it  must be recognized that real PCE typically moves somewhat erratically from quarter to quarter; statistically, the third-quarter drop-off in growth relative to the recent trend was far from unusual. It was a  less-than-one standard deviation departure. Moreover, such deviations from trend historically have had no  obvious predictive power with respect to subsequent spending growth. That certainly has been the case with the lulls in sales in  the past few years.

But setting aside purely statistical considerations, we see no compelling economic reason to anticipate that consumer demand will lapse into persistent weakness at this juncture. Among the key fundamentals, employment and income trends have remained quite healthy. To be sure, a  softening in spending can precede--and potentially cause--a downshift in  income. Arguing against that in this case, however, is the fact that consumer sentiment about the economic outlook has remained distinctly upbeat, judging from recent survey results. Moreover, the stock market has continued to

skyrocket, presumably reflecting an optimism about the future and in any event adding substantially further to household wealth.

That said, there are some balancing factors in  the consumption outlook; indeed, these have led us to anticipate only a partial reversal of  the jump in  the personal saving rate recorded last quarter. One is  the already heavy investment in consumer durables over the past few  years. Of course, this is far from  a  rigid constraint on  spending: While it is a  commonplace to talk about the exhaustion of  pent-up demand, consumers presumably can always find ways to spend when they have the wherewithal and confidence to do so.

Which brings me  to the other negative factor, the consumer debt situation. The thought that spending would be inhibited by household debt burdens has been expressed for some time--and yet spending and borrowing continued to climb. But, now  we  are confronted with an outright decline in  consumer credit in September--one, moreover, that followed some months of reported tightening of  lending policies. The full dimension of  the September weakening wasn't known at the time we wrapped up our economic forecast, but--given the sizable upward revisions to prior months--it represented no surprise against our anticipation of a  considerable third-quarter slackening in  debt use.

Because contractions in  consumer credit are not the norm in the midst of solid economic expansions, the recent drop does give us some pause; but we aren't inclined to view the thus far brief downturn as compelling evidence that the expansion of consumer spending has run into a  roadblock of excessive debt and restricted credit availability. Rather, we think it more reasonable at this point to regard it as further evidence that debt burdens may in fact be one of  the influences that have tended to offset the stimulative effect of the

massive rise in net worth that has occurred. I  might also note that bond yields in the past few days have been noticeably lower than we anticipate will prevail over coming months: should they not rebound, and certainly should the rally be extended, it would provide a  more supportive financial environment for demand. There are already signs of  an  upswing in  mortgage refinancings.

The other important surprise in  the third-quarter GDP picture was the size of  the jump in nonfarm inventory investment. However, with the receipt of  the September figures for wholesale stocks last Friday, it now looks like the buildup may have been appreciably less rapid than it earlier appeared. Even before we saw the latest data, we didn't believe that there was any significant overhang of undesired stocks; it looks still less likely now. Under the circumstances, we are inclined to stick with our projection of a  moderate fourth-quarter accumulation, so that the swing in  inventory investment should now be a  lesser drag on GDP growth in  the current period.

The other major surprises of  the intermeeting period came from the labor market. First, the unemployment rate remained below 51/4 percent, rather than edging back up--this despite the fact that real GDP growth now  appears to have run slower than predicted in  the last Greenbook. We  have carried the lower jobless rate through the projection period. In part, this reflects our guess that output growth over the past year or two has been greater than measured, thereby providing a  stronger rationale for the recent level of unemployment.

The second labor market surprise was, of  course, the incoming information on  wages. The unexpectedly modest third-quarter advance in  the ECI for total compensation caused us to lower our estimate of the trend to that point. That was fairly straightforward. Less so

was the reassessment of, in essence, the level of  the NAIRU. Looking at the apparent fact that compensation had accelerated only a  little this year, in the face of an  unemployment rate averaging under 5-1/2 percent, we judged that our previous view of effective labor market slack probably had been too pessimistic. Our current forecast is more compatible with the  notion that the effective NAIRU is in  the vicinity of 5.6 percent.

Our inflation projection was also lowered by  more favorable prospects for food and energy prices going forward. Crude oil prices hopefully have peaked now, albeit at higher levels than we anticipated, and a  better than expected corn and soybean crop is being harvested. All told, we're still projecting that maintenance of the current policy stance will yield a  gradual updrift in  the true underlying trend of  inflation, but overall measured CPI increases now are predicted to drop back below 3  percent in the next two years.

There clearly is much more that could be said on  these critical issues. But, in  the interest of  the efficient use of  your time, I  should stop now and see what questions you  have.

FOMC Briefing

David E.  Lindsey

The data released since the last FOMC meeting have been seen in financial markets as reinforcing the case for leaving the federal funds rate unchanged. The report of a  slowdown in economic growth in the third quarter and  subdued readings on labor costs and  prices confirmed to  market participants the desirability of standing pat at the September FOMC meeting and appeared to convince them that the Committee will do so  again at this meeting. Indeed, as Peter noted, federal funds futures quotes indicate that market participants have fully removed the prior consensus expectation of  policy tightening over the next few  months.

The staff forecast, which assumes an  unchanged federal funds rate through 1998, has become slightly more optimistic this time about the outlook for wages and  prices, even while the unemployment rate going forward has been revised down slightly. In  the Greenbook, the economy's expansion is slated to continue at around its potential growth rate, while total CPI inflation is seen as most likely to  run a  bit below 3  percent over 1997 and 1998. Even so, as Mike and Dave have discussed, some adverse forces on  prices are lurking just beneath the surface of the staff forecast. With the economy anticipated to be  pressing a little beyond its estimated potential, the staff expects to see a gradual upcreep in labor compensation and underlying price

November 13, 1996

inflation. However, technical adjustments to the core CPI mask what would otherwise be  a  considerable acceleration from this year to 1998 with an  unchanged policy stance. Thus, while the reported core CPI inflation rate rises only to 3 percent in 1998, this is a misleadingly low figure in  the following sense: It incorporates less of an  overstatement--by an  estimated four tenths percentage point--than we  had been accustomed to in  the past.

If the Committee were confident in  predicting both this gradual upcreep in underlying inflation pressures and the continued low  unemployment rate on  which that upcreep depends, it might contemplate a  policy tightening. Alternatively, the Committee may wish to  wait to  make sure that the rebound in spending later this year projected by  the staff is in fact in train before contemplating a  tightening action. Indeed, if the Committee has sufficient concern about weak spending over the intermediate term, it  might consider whether the current policy stance is overly restrictive and  whether a  policy easing at this meeting might be  warranted. These three alternatives were discussed in the bluebook, so I won't cover them in  detail now. In the event, the Committee may not see the intermediate-term downside spending risks as great enough to justify easing, nor the long-term inflationary risks as certain enough for tightening. If so, the questions remaining on  the table today would seem to  be: Does the new information on slower spending and lessened inflation pressures justify reverting to  a  symmetric

directive, or even to an asymmetry toward ease? Or should the bias toward tightening be retained?

I must note at the outset that the issue of symmetry or asymmetry in  the directive in  one sense is less relevant now  than in  the  past owing to the Committee's evident increased predilection to  make policy changes at scheduled FOMC meetings rather than between meetings. To  be  sure, in exceptional cases of  very surprising data, the tilt of the directive still would provide some guidance to the Chairman in  considering whether to react to those data.

The bias of the directive, or lack thereof, does, however, retain a  role once it becomes public as signalling Committee concerns about the  predominant risks to the economic outlook and the direction it is leaning in  viewing the likelihood of future policy moves. The bias may  occasionally even allow the Committee as a  whole to "pave the way" or "set the stage" for future policy action.

Moving to a  symmetric directive, or to  an asymmetric one toward ease, would seem to need to rest on  at least one of two pillars: a  sense of greater near-term downside risks to spending or  of lesser longer-term inflationary risks than embodied in the staff forecast. Mike has already addressed several notes of caution about prospects for consumption expenditures, including a little decline in consumer credit in September. Moreover, in the November survey, bank loan officers reported more stringent practices for consumer lending over the previous three months.

As for the second possible pillar supporting a  case for a  change in the tilt of the directive, the Committee might view the staff as being too timid in lowering its estimate of the natural rate of unemployment only a  notch.

Maintaining a  bias toward tightening would appear to  be called for if the underlying inflation outlook were seen to  be  at least as problematic as in the Greenbook. Using the directive in this way to indicate a  vigilant posture against inflation might also seem justified by  more widespread anecdotal reports of late of tighter labor markets and  intensifying pressures on  labor costs. Pressures on labor costs could become still worse, of course, should spending spring back more vigorously than the staff foresees, an eventuality made more probable by the continuing rallies in  bond and stock markets.

As a  final subject of  my  remarks, I'd like to give a  brief update on the monetary aggregates. M2 expansion slowed in September and  October and  this aggregate is likely to  grow 4 percent for the  year as a whole. This pace is further below the 5 percent upper bound of its annual range than we  thought in the last bluebook. By  contrast, M3 growth has strengthened more than expected of late, and is likely to finish the  year around the 6 percent upper bound of its range. But we  are  not interpreting this latter development as an  indicator of robust spending. Rather, it seems to  be associated partly with shifting bank financing patterns and, additionally, with a  recent-months' surge

in  business lending that could be reflecting in  part an inventory buildup.