APPENDIX

FOMC NOTES -PRF

May  20, 1997

Mr. Chairman:

Since your last meeting, we  have had quite a  move in  dollar-yen.

In  domestic operations, unexpectedly-higher tax  revenues provided the Desk with the opportunity to set a  new record for  outstanding temporary operations.

I will first try  to explain the movements in  dollar-yen and, then, our  domestic operations.

As  you can see on  the first page of charts,

U.S. short-term forward rates first rose and then declined, returning to levels just below where they traded at  the time of  your last meeting;

but still well above their levels prior to the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony in late February.

German forward rates have declined modestly, reflecting a  continuation of expectations for:

relatively weak growth;

political stalemate on  tax and  pension reform; and no  change in  rates by  the  Bundesbank for the foreseeable future.

In  contrast, Japanese forward rates have been rising since the start of the new fiscal year on  April 1st.

This shift in  expectations appears to  reflect:

an  unwinding of  the extremely pessimistic market sentiment toward the Japanese economy.

With the traders' skepticism being eroded, and  loud noises from some quarters of  the  Bank of  Japan and the Ministry of Finance that monetary policy will be firmed,

markets --  once again --  are beginning to  price in  a tightening by  the Bank of Japan later this year.

Turning to the second page, as you can  see in  the first panel,

Consistent with the pattern of  short-term expectations:

U.S. bond  yields, shown in  green, continued to  back up in early April, along with those of  Germany and the  United Kingdom,

but began to decline with the release of  the first quarter Employment Cost Index, at the end  of  April.

As  you  can see, U.K. yields, shown in  purple, dropped sharply on May  6th with the Chancellor's announcement of  a  25  basis point increase in  base rates and the granting of operational independence to  the Bank of  England.

Again in contrast, Japanese 10-year bond yields, in the second panel in  red, began sharply rising from the end of  April through early May,

reflecting the change in  sentiment about the domestic economy; and accelerating as the Nikkei broke through the 20 thousand level.

In the bottom panel, you can see the sharp decline of the dollar against the yen, depicted in  red, beginning on  May 6th, and then accelerating quickly.

At the time, most market analysts focused upon the  conjunction of:

The relentless verbal intervention by  Ministry of Finance officials, throughout the week of  May 5th -9th, seeking to strengthen the yen  vs the dollar; and

The Chairman's speech at NYU  on  the evening of  May 8th, which market participants perceived as implying a decreased likelihood of an  increase in  U.S. rates at this meeting.

However, among the causes of this extraordinary exchange-rate movement I  think the back-up in Japanese interest rates, and  interest rate expectations, deserves our special attention,

as it triggered an  initial unwinding of  the infamous "yen  carry trade".

To begin with, it is worth noting, the relative stability of  dollar-mark; depicted in  the bottom panel in  blue, and

the lack --  so  far --  of any  apparent knock-on consequences for other U.S. asset markets from the significant move in  dollar-yen.

Turning to the third page of  charts, you  can see

The sharp upward movement in  the Japanese 10-year bond yield, again depicted in the first panel,

The decline in 10-year differentials with Japan for  U.S., German and  U.K. bonds since April 1st, in  the second panel;&amp;

The percent appreciations of the  yen  against the dollar, the mark and the pound sterling, also since April 1st, in  the third panel.

Taking all this together,

I  think that the backup in  Japanese rates, which accelerated from May 6th  through the 9th,

Coupled with the downward drift in  U.S. and  other long-term rates,

Gave the strong impression that the market may  have been  passing through  the  peak in  interest-rate  ferentials dif between Japan and the rest of  the world;

encouraging many of those who  had  borrowed yen to  finance rades nto igher  yielding  ssets t i h a to  begin to  close out  these positions.

So, while the yen  strengthened against the dollar,

- I  think  we  need to  be careful o  avoid t a  completely  "dollar-centric"   of the  world; view

And  need to  recognize that the  yen strengthened against a  wide range of  currencies, with  pressures being felt not only in  the major exchange rates;

but  also  in  emerging  markets  from the  Czech Republic  to  Thailand, whose currencies came under pressures at  the same time.

In  all likelihood, is  s  just he  first  chapter n  the th i t i unwinding of leveraged en financing. y

Turning to  domestic  operations,

As  described in  detail in  our written report, the  Desk  faced  what seemed, on some  days, to  be  the Sisyphean task of injecting er-larger  uantities   reserves ev q of to  offset an  historic forecast miss in  anticipated tax inflows.

On  the fourth page of  charts, in  the first panel, you  can  see:

- --Our original forecast for  the Treasury's Fed  Balance, as of  April 14th, depicted in the flat, black line at  the bottom;
- Treasury's actual balance, depicted in  the heavy blue line,
- --Our  one-day prior forecast in  green, and
- --Our same-day forecast, in  red.

It's easy to see the gap  between our  original forecast and  the actual.

But the scale and  the slope of  the lines makes it a  little harder to  appreciate the significance of the gap  between our  one-day out forecast, in  green, and our  revision of that forecast the  next morning, in  red,

- which from  April 22nd to  April 30th, was never less than 2.2 billion and  ranged as high as 9 billion.

In  the bottom panel, you can see how the  Desk responded, arranging a  series of term RPs, until, by  April 30th, we  had  just less than 52  billion [par amount] in  outstanding RPs on  our books.

On  the fifth page of charts, you  can see the daily range and  daily effective rate for  the Fed Funds market,

For the same period of  last year, in  the top  panel,

And for this year, in  the bottom panel.

Looking at the bottom panel for this year, the five or  so instances of  high ranges, were associated with elevated late-day funds rates,

when  we  either experienced large projection misses, or  when the dealers' propositions fell short of  our objectives.

If you focus on  the short red lines which indicate the daily effective rates, 1997 looks much like 1996: the weighted-average effective rates are reasonably close to  the target.

However, if  one focuses on  the difference in  the ranges between 1996 and 1997, With one might be tempted to  assume (as  we  initially did)

that our forecast misses in 1997 were larger

1997's wider fluctuations, and  more numerous than in 1996.

But that is  not the case: the  misses between our  same-day forecast and the  actual Treasury balance (the difference between the red and the  blue lines on the previous page)

[and actual reserve levels] were roughly comparable in  both years.

Thus, our initial conclusion is  that the market is somewhat more sensitive this year, compared to last year, which may  be  owing to  the lower operating balances.

The final page of charts, presents the same two  periods of funds market trading, depicting daily funds market trading ranges as  expressed in  a  single, standard deviation around the  effective rate.

This, in  effect, simply presents a  more muted version of  the range chart, reflecting the relatively limited trading volume at the highest (and  lowest) funds rates, and  underscoring the banking system's ability to  operate with low  reserve balances.

We  had no  foreign exchange intervention operations during the period.

I  will need  the Committee's ratification of  our domestic operations during the period.

- I  would be  happy to answer any  questions about my  report, or  my  note to the Committee members on  my intention to accelerate our runoff of  agency securities.

<!-- missing-text -->

Page 2

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Basis Ponts

<!-- missing-text -->

Møy

<!-- missing-text -->

Markets Group: FRBNY Ullianne Gu

Treasury Balance at  Fed

<!-- missing-text -->

Daily  and Cumulative Outstanding  RPs

<!-- missing-text -->

Markets Group; FRBNY

Drew T. Matus

Federal  Funds Daily  Range and  Effective

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Cassandra Bryant Markets Group FRBNY

Federal Funds Plus and  Minus One  Standard  Deviation and  Effective

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Michael J. Prell

May  20,

1997

FOMC BRIEFING

The Greenbook lays out what is, in  many respects, a  fairly attractive baseline scenario. Economic growth slows sharply from the first-quarter pace, but it remains strong enough to hold the unemployment rate below 5  percent. Although the  underlying direction of inflation is up from here, the rise is gradual. Indeed, thanks to favorable developments in the food and energy sectors, and with a little help from  technical changes to the index, headline CPI inflation only nudges the 3  percent mark next year.

To be sure, we're still saying that you'll probably need to raise interest rates further if  you  wish to keep inflation in  check. But, according to our forecast, you could delay action for some time without fearing that events would seriously undermine what currently seems to be considerable public confidence that inflation will remain moderate well into the future.

On  the other hand, we've also warned that, if  our forecast is wrong, the greater risk is that aggregate demand will prove more buoyant and produce more troublesome inflationary pressures. There are two components to this assessment. The first relates to  the prospects for aggregate demand itself, the second to  how stronger demand might translate into greater inflation.

In the interest of  conserving time, I  won't dwell on the second issue. In a  nutshell, we  believe a  tight labor market already has generated an upturn in compensation inflation--and that, were it not for the appreciation of  the dollar, we  would have seen a  slight increase in core consumer inflation. With the  dollar presumed to  have topped out, that external influence is  about to turn less favorable.

FOMC Briefing

-

Michael Prell

May 20,

1997

Page 2

Within our analytical  amework, fr one could paint  more a sanguine inflation outlook by  postulating some positive supply shocks. For example, the  economy  could  be  on the  verge  of  the  long-awaited productivity payoff from the investments in  information technology. Or  the  dollar  ould resume its  uptrend  and continue o  make  it  cheaper c t to tap foreign sources. But, we  also could readily postulate unfavorable evelopments,  such as crop shortfalls   disruptions d or of Middle Eastern oil supplies.

What I'd like to do is put aside for now  this set of questions elating r to the supply  side  of  the  equation nd return  o a t the  matter of aggregate demand. In  particular, I want to  talk about the prospects or  output  growth and why  we  believe hat f t the distribution   risks urrounding ur baseline orecast  ontinues to of s o f c be  skewed to  the  upside.

This is  getting  o  be an  excessively  amiliar  efrain.  e've t f r W been saying  the  same  thing  for  a  good  many  months now,  and,  frankly, I don't  get  a  lot f gratification  m getting  nly  the  errors ight. o fro o r So,  in  framing  our latest ojection,    certainly ied  o  assure pr we tr t ourselves hat hat we  were writing  own  is  the  most likely  utcome t w d o under the  assumed monetary policy.

What  we  are  forecasting is that growth of real GDP, which has been 4.1 percent over the past four quarters, will slow to 2.2 percent over the ensuing four. More than half of this deceleration is accounted  for  by a  swing in  inventory nvestment, hich contributed i w heavily  to  output  growth in  the  year  ended in  the  first quarter,  nd a is  projected to retard growth appreciably in the coming year. The remainder of the slowing is attributable to  various components of

FOMC Briefing

-

Michael Prell

May 20,

1997

Page 3

final sales, none of  which individually makes an especially remarkable contribution.

Now, given the dynamics of  the economy, one-can't look at inventories and final demand separately in assessing the plausibility of  the forecast. As  we  indicated in  the Greenbook, it would seem unreasonable to expect that firms will continue indefinitely to accumulate stocks at the 5 percent annual rate of  the first quarter. But, if final demand were to fail to decelerate as we've forecast, then inventory investment certainly could run close to that pace for a year without pushing stock-sales ratios to burdensome levels. Indeed, such strong demand growth could well lead to circumstances in which supply channels were strained and firms raised their target inventory ratios to insure against stock-outs--if not as a  hedge against rising costs.

So, it all would seem to come down to whether it is reasonable to forecast, as we  have, that final sales will grow 2-1/2 percent over the coming year, instead of 3-1/4 percent as in  the last. There are a  number of elements of the economic and financial picture that lead us to  think that demand will slow to  this moderate degree. One is that we  have seen hefty growth in real outlays for consumer and producers' durables in  the past few  years, and  the levels of investment already are sufficient to allow stocks to grow at a  good clip. Similarly, in  the housing market, building is  widely viewed as having run for a while now  at a  pace somewhat above what one might expect to be sustained, given demographic trends. Nominal interest rates, which had  dropped during 1995, generally rose from late 1995 to early 1997--and real rates probably rose still more, judging by surveys of  inflation expectations, especially longer-term

FOMC Briefing

-

Michael Prell

May 20, 1997

Page 4

expectations. And the dollar rose considerably over the past year, which should weigh on net exports in coming quarters.

We think these are, cumulatively, reasonably persuasive arguments for expecting growth of  final demand to slow. Of  course, one might have told some of  these same stories prior to  the surge of the past couple of quarters. In fact, we  did! But, in  the interim, the stocks of  real assets have only grown larger, and much of  the dollar's run-up has occurred just since last fall.

What gives us pause, however, and causes us to  continue emphasizing the upside risks to  aggregate demand, is some of  the other developments that have occurred in  the  interim. Business sentiment appears to have improved. And indexes of consumer sentiment have skyrocketed--to an unprecedented level in  the case of  last Friday's preliminary Michigan SRC survey for  May. Perhaps reflecting those moods, or contributing to them, the stock market has soared to  new heights, adding to  household wealth and lowering the cost of  equity capital for corporations; indeed, last week, we saw  some hints that the IPO market, which has been in a  lull, might be starting to revive. Banks, though becoming more chary of  lending to marginal consumers, have become still more aggressive in seeking business loans. The commercial real estate market is showing ever more signs of  booming.

A  number of  these factors are in  the nature of "animal spirits." Their force is hard to gauge, and they could also prove fragile and ephemeral. But they are there now, and we  would be  more concerned that we haven't made adequate allowance for them in our baseline forecast than that we've overestimated their significance. We certainly see the risk of their imparting some extra cyclical momentum to  demand as greater than the probability that the economy

FOMC Briefing - Michael Prell May 20, 1997

Page 5

will go flat in the  near term. And, if  that upside risk were to materialize, it likely would take a  pretty sharp policy move to  avoid a  significant deterioration of  the inflation outlook.

Contributions  o  Real t GDP Growth (Percentage Points)

<!-- missing-text -->

NOTE: Based on staff  stimates of  1997:Q1  GDP. e Contributions do not sum precisely  to  the totals wing  to  rounding and  residuals. o

FOMC Briefing

Donald L.  Kohn

Again the Committee is faced with a  decision about whether to tighten monetary policy. Data since the last meeting would only seem to  have highlighted (1)  the strength of  aggregate demand, which was cited as  reason for tightening in  March, and the  associated rise in  resource utilization; and (2)  questions about the relation of  growth and resource utilization to inflation.

Items in the first category might be  seen as supporting additional near-term firming of  policy. Obviously, there's considerable uncertainty about the degree of labor market tightness that can  be  sustained over time. But, whatever the uncertainties, a  falling unemployment rate heightens the risk that the economy is operating beyond its long-run potential, except in the  unlikely event that  fundamental supply and  demand determinants in labor markets are evolving continuously to moderate cost increases.

The Committee would not  have to  be  so  concerned with assessing whether the unemployment rate has slipped to  below full employment if it  were confident that the stance of  policy was already sufficiently restrictive to keep the economy close to its  potential. In  this circumstance, any  increase in  inflation would be  quite limited. In fact, real interest rates are  now  at, or  above, levels that in the  past 20 or  30  years have been consistent with containing inflation. Although interest rates

are about unchanged over the intermeeting period, this does not imply that your tightening had  no  effect on  credit markets; most of  it  had  already been priced in. Relative to  just before the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, yields still are up  about a  quarter point or  so.

Nonetheless, in  the staff forecast they are  not  high enough and inflation trends higher; stated another way, the "equilibrium" interest rates implied by  that forecast are  appreciably above historical averages of  real rates, and  policy is still accommodative. This judgment is consistent with the observation that intermediateand long-term rates around current levels over the  past year have been associated with robust growth over subsequent quarters that, judging from the unemployment rate, has permitted the economy to run  above its estimated potential.

Mike gave several reasons why  current rates may  not  be providing sufficient restraint; I'll add  a  few  more. One is the persistent strength in  profits. This strength suggests an abundance of  highly productive investment opportunities. Although such investment increases the  economy's potential over an  extended period, in the short run the  demand for capital goods tends to  put pressure on  the economy's ability to supply such goods, driving up  prices. In effect, the higher marginal product of  capital needs to  be  matched with higher interest rates to  keep savings and investment in  balance. Another, longer run, reason why  equilibrium real rates might creep up  over time is the evolution of financial markets. A  wider variety of sources of

funds for  borrowers implies fewer nonprice constraints on  credit, and  more pressure on  prices--that is, interest rates--to ration scarce savings. This is an  ongoing process; a  recent example is the securitization of commercial real estate loans, which is reducing dependence on  traditional lenders, and  helping to finance the recovery in  this area.

If  you share the staff forecast perspective that the current unemployment rate is  probably too low  to  be  consistent with containing inflation and  that financial conditions are  probably insufficiently restrictive to  bring the  economy back to  a  sustainable level, then tightening would seem to be  called for before too long. Prompt action, at  this meeting might appear justified if  you  were determined to  head off any  possible increase in inflation and  wanted to lean in  the direction of bringing it  down over the long run. Immediate firming might also be  appealling if  you shared Mike's view that the risks were tilted toward higher utilization than in  the Greenbook forecast, and  you  wanted to  have greater assurance of  avoiding more abrupt and  possibly disruptive tightening later.

Tightening would come as some surprise to the  markets, but an  outsized reaction to  a  1/4 point move would be  unlikely. Developments over the recent intermeeting period would seem to suggest a  considerable--and perhaps not entirely desirable-market resiliency to  policy firming. Against the  background of the  announcement in  March together with more rapid first-quarter GDP  growth than  most had  anticipated and a  falling unemployment

rate, the markets would see such an  action as a  logical extension of  the  Committee's last move. However, because growth is  perceived to  be  slowing, the  Committee likely would be interpreted as being especially attentive to the level of the  unemployment rate.

Some of the recent data, on the other hand, would seem to lend support to  arguments for standing pat now  and  adopting a cautious approach to any further tightening. The  economy does seem to  be slowing, holding out the  hope that resource utilization rates may stabilize. In  this regard, the  current circumstances differ from those facing the Committee at  its last meeting, when the  pace of economic expansion was clearly exceeding the  growth of  potential. In  addition, cost and  price increases have remained remarkably restrained, which, as  noted, have underlined uncertainties about the inflation process. In  the staff forecast, with the output gap  constant and inflation damped for  a  time, costs in terms of higher inflation of  waiting for a short while are  not large, and the  Committee may  view the staff as possibly unduly pessimistic about price prospects. Moreover, there are costs to  tightening in the form of lower output and employment, if such an  action turns out  to  be  unnecessary to contain inflation; in  this latter circumstance, though, additional progress toward price stability enhancing longer-term economic efficiency would presumably balance those costs.

One  reason the costs of  waiting should not  be  large, even if underlying inflation is about to  edge higher, is that inflation

expectations should remain damped on  either Wall Street or  Main Street. Although most economists working for financial firms believe that tightening is  necessary to  contain inflation and will be  forthcoming, this perception does not seem to  pervade markets. The structure of short-term rates indicates only modest odds on  a  tightening at this meeting. Moreover, the overall slope of the  yield curve is  close to  its historic average, suggesting that little, if any, upward movement of  rates is seen as  necessary to  keep inflation from strengthening over the longer haul. On  Main Street, damped increases in  broad price indexes, helped by  food and  energy prices and  by  the  past appreciation in the dollar, should hold down inflation expectations. Perhaps for these reasons, Michigan survey results show slightly lower mean inflation expectations in  recent months, though the  medians haven't changed much.

Even if the risks are seen to  be  tilted toward higher inflation, not  moving at the  current meeting would be  consistent with a  strategy that dealt with this possibility, but contemplated an  especially deliberate pace of tightening. Such a strategy might seem a  reasonable approach in  a  situation in  which the Committee has said that it  does not  view policy as substantially misaligned, and in  which evidence of  actual cost and price pressures is sparse. Caution might also be  engendered by tightening based almost entirely on  projected inflation outcomes, when projections of inflation over recent years--including, it now  seems likely, those by  Committee members last February--have

often turned out to  have been too  pessimistic. This approach would gradually reduce possible inflation risks while allowing the accretion of  additional information that might begin to resolve some of the uncertainties about the underlying inflation process.

One danger with such an  approach is that policy becomes too sluggish--that it tends to  be immobilized by  uncertainties and proceeds so  slowly that inflation pressures do  in  fact build. If the Committee chooses to keep policy unchanged at  this meeting, it might want to  be  especially flexible in  reacting to incoming news. In  these circumstances, an  asymmetrical directive would appear to  be  appropriate, clarifying the Committee's perception of  the risks and  signaling its willingness to  move promptly should the odds on  higher inflation become larger. Under some circumstances, a  flexible policy response also may  need to  be  a larger policy response over time. Catching up  if inflation pressures become more evident or  resource use  rises further is likely to  involve a  larger increase in  rates than a  successful preemptive policy.

If the  Committee adopts alternative B  and an  asymmetric directive, it  might also find it  useful to consider what kinds of information it  would look for  to trigger a  tightening--if not before July, then at a  scheduled meeting over the  next few months. Presumably, the failure of  the economy to slow enough to keep resource utilization rates from continuously rising further would signal an  unsustainable situation that would prompt action,

whatever the news on  costs and  prices. This circumstance would be  similar to the one  the Committee faced in  March--but now  at a lower unemployment rate.

The  more difficult circumstance would be  one in  which economic growth slows but only to  around the rate of  potential so labor markets retain their current degree of  tautness, but costs, prices, and inflation expectations remain quiescent for  a  time. The policy decision would involve a  weighing of  where the  Committee saw  the risks and  how it  wished to  weigh the  potential costs and  benefits of  possible outcomes. If the  Committee thought that the economic environment might have changed sufficiently in  recent years to  undermine its confidence in estimates of  unemployment rate-NAIRU gaps or  the inflation consequences of those gaps, it  presumably would avoid tightening until it saw  more definitive signs that inflation was in  the process of picking up. This strategy would enable the economy to enjoy the output fruits of its changing dynamics, and  might even be  consistent with lower inflation as  well, if indeed it is a "new  age". On  the other hand, if the  Committee still had  some conviction about the sustainable level of the unemployment rate, and  that level was thought to  be  above the current level, however uncertain the  Committee might be  about the exact specification, then further, perhaps cautious, tightening might be  called for even before higher inflation turned up  in  the data. Assuming the Committee would not  want to countenance a  more rapid rate of inflation, delaying action until prices accelerated under these

conditions would result in  policy accentuating, rather than damping, the  business cycle.