APPENDIX

FOMC NOTES -PRF JANUARY 30-31, 1996

Mr.  Chairman:

Since your last meeting, the dollar has appreciated by  about two and  half percent against the German mark and  by  more than four and  half percent against the Japanese yen. Although the general market view is  that the  U.S. economy is slowing somewhat, the dollar has  benefitted from the perception that foreign economies are slowing more rapidly, with the exception of Japan.

In  domestic interest-rate markets, expectations are  that short-term rates will be  coming down over the course of the  year. Bill rates, Euro-dollar future rates, and the Fed  Funds futures contracts all suggest that short-term rates will be  lower this summer than they are today. However, the February Fed  Funds futures contract suggests a  50-50 probability of a  25 basis point ease at  this meeting. Thus, while the  market clearly expects easing to  come, the Committee is seen as  having some flexibility at  this time.

In  contrast, foreign central banks are seen as  having less flexibility. Since your last meeting, official or  money market rates have been lowered by  the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the  Bank of  France and the  Bundesbank, as  well as  by other continental central banks. This principally reflects the markedly weaker outlook for European economies, compared to  what market participants had  been anticipating at the  end of  last year. As  a  result, the  magnitude of the shift in  expectations towards accommodative policies has been greater in  Europe than it has here in  the  U.S., and  the dollar has been the beneficiary.

The dollar has also appreciated against the  Japanese yen, where the story is different. While the  Bank of  Japan is still maintaining an  accommodative stance, holding the  overnight call money rate below 50  basis points, short-term rates are  seen as rising this year. This reflects the view that the economy may  be reviving and  that later this year the Bank of  Japan could begin to  raise rates.

Market sentiment toward the dollar clearly benefitted from the significant decline in  our bilateral trade deficit with Japan. The dollar has also  benefitted from the  perception that a strengthening Japanese economy will --  at least initially --lead to  a  weaker yen,through increased imports of  goods and increased outflows of  investment.

The  upward movement in  the  price of  gold and  the bumpy behavior of  our  bond market have been a  little more difficult to understand.

The general view of the gold market is that demand for gold, both industrial and for  jewelry, has  been growing more rapidly than supply from new  production. Prices have been held steady for  the last few  years by  central banks sales. But market participants now  perceive these selling programs to  be  winding down. The spike in  lease rates, at the end  of  last year, alerted investors to  the basic demand-supply imbalance and  contrasted with the exceptionally low  yields now  available in  some countries, notably Japan and  Switzerland.

With the  backdrop, I  am  inclined to  think of the recent, sudden uptick in  prices as  the result of something of  a speculative push. Also, full disclosure requires me  to  add that I  view the signal-to-noise ratio of  gold price movements as a good bit  worse than those of  the fairly-noisy interest rate and exchange rate markets. Moreover, gold prices are off by  two and half dollars today.

To  understand the  bumpiness in  the bond market, I  think it is  helpful to  take a  step back and  see that there are at least three distinct dances going on  at the  same time.

First, there is the normal back-and-forth shuffle of  market participants looking at  the economic data and  trying to anticipate the Committee's actions. Since your last meeting, this has  been complicated by  the rescheduling of  data collection and  releases. 5

Second, in  reaction to  fiscal politics, the market has developed a  three-step: two small steps forward, one  big  step back. In  the first step, when prospects for  a  genuine seven-year plan  to  balance the budget seem most promising, then buy  the long-end. Second, when the  politics of a  seven-year plan is at loggerheads and  this looks likely to  produce an  impasse on current outlays, then buy  the short-end --  on  expectations for current fiscal tightness. Third, when it appears that the politicians are going to  agree to  a  muddy compromise, with little real, fiscal discipline in the  shortor  long-run, then sell the long-end first.

Finally, the interaction of foreign and  domestic investors as  added another spin: something of  a  "do-si-do". Foreign investors, turned off  by  the  histrionics here in  Washington, have generally been  unable to  understand the nuances of  our  fiscal politics and  have, therefore, never gotten the hang  of  the fiscal-three-step. However, since the start of  the  year, there

has  been an  increasing awareness among foreign investors that U.S. fiscal performance and  prospects are better than they had thought and  better than those of  other industrial countries.

This has been  particularly aided, first, by  the announcement of  worse-than-expected German fiscal performance --  outside of the  Maastrict criteria in 1995 and  officially forecast to  be  so again in  1996 --  and, second, by  the realization of  just how open-ended the Japanese government's liability for the  banking system is likely to  be, on  top of  what are  already large Japanese fiscal deficits. So, while U.S. fiscal policy is not  yet seen overseas as a positive for  U.S. assets or  the dollar, it is decreasingly seen as a negative.

Last week, in  the data release shuffle, a  number of  market participants sold out their positions on  the view that, on current evidence, the bond market had  priced in  their view of the economy and there was little to  be  gained by  holding their positions any  longer. At the same time, other domestically oriented market participants became less optimistic about the prospects for fiscal consolidation, compared to  what they had been hoping for. However, foreign investors were becoming less pessimistic about the U.S. fiscal outlook, compared to  what they now  see  elsewhere in  the world. And  so  it  goes --  back-and-forth price movements caused both within each  of the three dances as well as from their interaction.

Turning to  our operations, we  had  no  foreign exchange intervention operations during the  period. But, as Secretary Rubin announced on  Friday, the  ESF and  the System were each repaid 650 million dollars by  the  Mexican authorities, completely repaying the  outstanding amounts on  the short-term swaps.

In  the funds market, we  have been both adding and  draining reserves, consistent with the seasonal behavior of  currency and required reserves. Demand for  excess reserves has been elevated, first around year-end and again as a  consequence of  the severe winter weather. The storms both created liquidity strains for some institutions and  high levels of float that other institutions were not able to  take advantage of. With all this going on, the funds rate was  a bit more volatile than normal.

In  the maintenance period just now  ending, we  are facing the lowest level of required operating balances in  five years, largely the consequence of  the cumulative effect of sweep programs adopted over the last year. Banks appear to  have wanted to  hold somewhat higher levels of  excess reserves, which we  have been allowing for, and  at least so far, we  have not experienced the extreme intraday volatility that occurred when balances were last this low  in  1991.

Mr.  Chairman, I will need the Committee's votes to  ratify our  foreign and  domestic operations. I would be  happy to  answer any  questions.

Michael J. Prell January 30, 1996

FOMC Chart Show Presentation --Introduction

We'll be devoting the bulk of  our presentation to some major analytical issues involved in assessing the trends in  the economy. But, before we get to that, I  want to give you a  brief update on recent developments.

As  you know, we've been hampered in  our work by  the delays in data availability. In gauging the growth of activity in  the fourth quarter, we had to rely even more than usual on  the labor market statistics. Key in this regard was the 2  percent, annual rate, rise in  production worker hours, the red line in  the upper left panel. If we  were to  tack on a  trend productivity increase, it  would imply that GDP might have risen in  the neighborhood of 3  percent last quarter. But, as  you can see, there is considerable variability in  this relationship, and in light of  the other available evidence, we decided to  put GDP growth at about the 2  percent mark.

Although this is a  respectable number, we  did sense that the economy exited 1995 on a  weak note. Among other things, initial claims for unemployment insurance, shown at the right, have been rather high recently.

On  the spending side, the most important statistics we had were for consumer purchases--and they were sketchy. This morning, a new  piece of  information was added--the Census advance estimates of retail sales in December. Non-auto sales, charted in  the  middle left panel, rose only two-tenths of  a  percent, in  nominal terms, last month--and that was from a  downwardrevised level for November. In sum, it was a  weak report. Taken at face value, even when combined with the reported year-end spurt in  sales of light vehicles, shown at

the right, these new figures would lower our estimate of fourthquarter growth in real consumer outlays from 1.8 percent to 1.4 percent. On  top of  that negative news, the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Index, released this morning, plummeted 12 points in January. This has been a  lousy month in  many ways, and the volatility of  the Conference Board index suggests that a  movement like the latest should be taken with a  grain of  salt; however, it does tend to reinforce the impression of  an  increased pessimism among consumers that might be damping demand.

There could be a  more disturbing message in  these numbers that will become apparent as additional data roll in, but at this point we see them mainly as reinforcing our conjecture about the current dynamics of  the economy--and of the  manufacturing sector in particular. The crux of our short-term forecast is  that businesses in a  variety of  sectors encountered weaker sales trends in  the past few months and decided that they had to take steps to curb the accumulation of  inventories. As you can see at the bottom left, the aggregate ratio of  inventories to sales rose in 1994 and early 1995, partly as firms tried to ensure that they had adequate materials or merchandise on hand in a  tighter supply environment. But, as demand moderated and vendor performance improved, they began to  trim orders-a  tendency that, according to  the survey results plotted at the right became quite significant of  late. Consequently, we  are expecting that factory output will decline this month. But, unless the consumer demand has hit a  sinkhole, rather than just a  minor pothole, this inventory correction should be largely completed soon and production should pick up.

This brings me  to the summary of  our forecast, in chart 2. As you-know, we expect that real GDP growth will dip below 1  percent in  the current quarter but then run around 2  percent through 1997. Because this approximates the estimated long-run trend, the unemployment rate is projected to remain close to the 5.6 per cent level that has prevailed for a  while now. We view this as implying some pressure on labor resources, and so  we think that there will be some tendency for inflation to creep upward. This trend is so slight, though, that it may  well be difficult to discern in the data, given normal statistical noise and various short-run economic factors that Dave will be discussing. However, as indicated in the bottom right panel, the overall CPI is expected to rise a  bit faster in the next two years than it has in  the past couple.

Our forecast is, as you know, based on  the assumption that the federal funds rate will remain in  the vicinity of  5-1/2 percent at least well into 1997. Because the markets currently are banking on further easing actions, we've projected that long-term rates will back up  a  few tenths of a  percent.

We  recognize that there is a  considerable body of opinion that maintenance of  the prevailing funds rate over the next couple of years would take a greater toll of activity. Chart 3  is intended to serve as the backdrop for a  few observations about this issue. I've plotted in the top panel measures of  real rates of  interest, using lagged changes in the core CPI to proxy for inflation expectations. As  you can see, the real bill rate has not changed greatly in the past year, but the real note rate has come down appreciably. Both of  these rates are above their long-term averages, but there have been substantial periods in  the 1980s and 1990s during which the economy

has done quite well with the real rates even higher than those now prevailing or in our forecast.

The middle panel looks at  this point in another way, focusing specifically on  the funds rate. It plots the real fed funds rate against the gap between the levels of potential and actual real GDP two years hence. I  should emphasize that neither of  these concepts is measurable with any precision, but--be that as it may--the curves have been placed so that the averages for the two series are aligned--about 1/4 percent for the gap and 2-1/4 percent for the funds rate. The real funds rate is estimated to have averaged about 2-3/4 percent last year, but with the trimming of  the nominal rate to  5-1/2 percent last month, the real rate should run a  bit lower over the forecast period. Based solely on these data, one might think that the economy should have been stronger in  the past few  years, given the low real funds rates that prevailed earlier in  the 1990s. And scanning across the chart, at least as far back as the 1970s, one might also argue that the current funds rate implies a  weaker economic outlook for 1997 than we  have projected. But it is clear that, while the real rate and the GDP gap are correlated, there is  more than a  little play in  the relationship between them. Many factors presumably can alter the natural, or equilibrium, real rate of interest from one period to another.

For example, in the early 1990s, the tightness of  credit associated in  part with the travails of  financial institutions lowered the rate of  interest needed to foster high levels of  activity. As you can see in  the bottom left panel, the circumstances have changed greatly since then. Whereas in 1990 almost a third of bank assets were in  under-capitalized institutions, last year almost all the

assets were held by  well-capitalized banks. The panel at the right shows that banks have made a  major swing toward easier terms and standards in  their business lending; although our latest survey shows that some banks are becoming a  bit more cautious in qualifying borrowers, it is  fair to say that bank credit is still readily available. In fact, access to bank loans is the last thing many bigger firms are concerned about today, given the attractiveness of the bond and stock markets and the still high level of  internal cash flow. Moreover, small businesses surveyed by the  NFIB recently reported the best credit supply conditions of this expansion.

Another factor that could affect the equilibrium real rate is fiscal policy. Chart 4  is designed to provide some idea of  the range of possibilities that exists in  this arena. The first pair of  columns in  the table outlines the assumptions we  made in the last Greenbook, when it appeared there was a good chance of  agreement on  a  multi-year balanced budget plan. In  the ensuing weeks, the direction the budget talks were taking suggested that the plans being discussed were becoming ever more back-loaded and gimmicky. And, then, the talks were suspended. Under the circumstances, we  thought it more realistic to assume there would be  no comprehensive agreement but that discretionary spending would still be cut appreciably. As you can see in  the January Greenbook columns, this reduced the amount of  deficit reduction in  both years, but especially in FY 97.

After the State of  the Union, Speaker Gingrich announced the GOP leadership's intention to offer a so-called "downpayment" package of  tax and spending actions. What kind of  proposal will be made is far from clear, but the third pair of columns is our stab at describing one version. In it, the full $29 billion tax cut that has

been mentioned is implemented for 1996 liabilities, but the actual revenue loss is scored as occurring largely after the end of  the current fiscal year, so that PAYGO rules are not violated. The political problem with such a  scheme is evident in  the top line. though: How  could something portrayed as a  "downpayment" on a balanced budget involve an increase in  the FY  97 budget deficit? So, where this idea is headed just isn't clear, and I've shown it mainly to suggest what might be  the other extreme in  the range of  possible fiscal options.

The  middle panel shows the budget outlook under all three alternatives. Our current assumption--the dashed line--results in only mild changes in  the high employment budget deficit over the next two years. The balanced budget compromise of  the December Greenbook would result in  a  small decline in the structural deficit, while the "downpayment" would result in a  slight increase.

The bottom panel displays the staff's fiscal impetus measure, in  which changes in  various tax and outlay categories are weighted in accordance with their estimated effects on aggregate demand. As you can see, under all three alternatives, a marginal increase in restraint is imposed this year, but the amount of restraint next year could end up being rather mild. Looked at in these simple terms, the equilibrium real rate of interest might tend to rise in the period ahead, all other things equal.

Ted  will now look at some of the impulses that may be coming from the external sector.

E.M.Truman

January  30,  1996

FOMC Chart  Show  Presentation International  velopments -De

As Mike noted, e constructed  he  Chart  Show  for his eeting  with  relatively  ss mphasis w t t m le e on the  details  f he  forecast d relatively  re emphasis  on analytical d longer-run  ssues.  In o t an mo an i that pirit,  e  first ternational  art resents   brief  ummary  of  the  staff's  tlook or he  external s th in ch p a s ou f t sector.  Our outlook oes  not  differ  uch from that resented  n  recent reenbooks,  taking ccount f d m p i G a o the  shift   chained  (1992)  dollars. to

As can  be seen  by  the  black  line n  the  top  panel, et xports f oods and  services  n  nominal i n e o g i terms  are rojected  o  be essentially  changed over  the  next  two years hile  the  current  ccount p t un w a deficit,  e  red  line,  idens  slightly  cause  of ising  et  payments  on our  cumulating et  external th w be r n n liabilities. ertheless,  shown in  the  box at  the  right,  he  annual  current  ccount  deficit ges  just Nev as t a ed below  2 percent f DP  this ear  and next. o G y

In  terms  of  chained 1992)  dollars, e  growth of  real xports f  goods and  services, e  black ( th e o th line n  the  middle  panel, ecelerated  harply n  1995 with  the  slowdown in  growth  abroad  and the i d s i impact  of  the  Mexican devaluation.  This  year, ith  our  projection   somewhat faster  rowth w of g abroad,  export rowth  should  pick  up  a bit,  ut  is  likely  o  be  depressed ater  n  1996 and  into 997 g b t l i 1 by the  recent ppreciation   the  dollar.  n the  import  side, he  red  line,  omewhat faster  .S. a of O t s U growth  and  the ollar's  preciation ould  lead  to  more growth  this  ear  with  a  slight  lowing  in d ap sh y s 1997 as  the  effects  f  the  appreciation ar off. o we

This  pattern  s  recast  n  the ottom  panel  in  terms  of  the  contributions   he  two components i i b oft of  net  exports nd their  ombined total  o  the  growth  of  real DP. a c t G As you can  see  from  the  blue bars,  the et  contribution  er  the  next wo years  is  essentially  ro. n ov t ze

Your next  chart ooks  at  exchange  rates.  The top  left  anel epicts  n  the  black  line l p d i

movements in  the  price-adjusted  llar  n  terms  of  other -10 currencies ong  with  the  differential do i G al in real ong-term nterest tes,  he  red  line.  The panel  at  the  right  resents  hanges  in  the  G-18 as  well l i ra t p c as  the  G-10 price-adjusted  llar  long  with  changes  in  the  G-10 real nterest fferential r  the ast do a i di ove p three ears, easured  from fourth uarter  o  fourth uarter.  Two  points:  First, e  link  etween y m q t q th b changes  in  the  dollar  nd  changes  in  interest  tes  s resent  ut  weak.  Second,  movements  in  the  Ga ra i p b 18 dollar  ave  been  somewhat more muted than  movements in  the  G-10 dollar  ot  only  in  1995,  when h n the  former  was affected  y the  Mexican depreciation,  t  also  in  previous  ears. b bu y

Movements  in  the  dollar  n  real erms  are  an  obvious ource  of otential ror n  our  forecast. i t s p er i The middle  panel  presents  wo estimates  f  the  variation at an  be introduced  nto ur  forecasts t o th c i o by movements  in  the  price-adjusted  10 dollar.  The red  bars re  actual  hanges, 4 to  Q4, in  the Ga c Q dollar.  The black  bars re  errors  n  our  four-quarter-ahead jections r he  dollar  ade in a i pro fo t m December of  the  past ight ears.  In  1990,  we  shifted  o  a basic osture f rojecting   unchanged e y t p o p an nominal  foreign xchange  value  of  the  dollar  rom  recent  evels;  ince hen, he  two estimates  f  the e f l s t t o variation  hat an  be introduced  nto ur  forecast ve  been  very  close. The average bsolute  hange t c i o ha a c for  the  eight-year riod n  the  G-10 dollar  n  real erms  has  been  about  5-1/2 ercent.  The pe i i t p corresponding  verage  absolute  hange  in  the  real -18 dollar  as  been  about  4 percent. a c G h

The  bottom  panel  illustrates    implications r ur  GDP  forecast   a  four-percent ange  in the fo o of ch the  price-adjusted  18 dollar  hat ccurs ver  the  four  quarters  f  1996 and  is  sustained  n  nominal Gt o o o i terms  through  1998. Such a  change can  be  viewed as  a rough  confidence  and around  a Greenbook b baseline  orecast  here  the  dollar  s  normally rojected  o  be  unchanged. The black nd red  bars f w i p t a show the  implications   terms  of  the  contribution  xports nd  imports, espectively,    the  growth in ofe a r to of  real DP. G The blue  bars  show the  overall  ffect  n real DP e o G incorporating edback  effects  ased fe b on  a simulation  f  the  staff's  onometric odels. In  the  simulations,  e  federal  unds  rate s  held o ec m th f i unchanged,  but  monetary  policies  broad  respond  endogenously.  Two  symmetric  cases  are resented: a p

dollar  epreciation he olid  ars) nd  dollar  ppreciation he pen  bars). d (t s b a a (t o

Taking  the  case  of epreciation,  e olid ars, he  weaker  dollar  nitially ments  the d th s b t i aug positive  ontribution    expanding  exports o  real DP c of t G growth  and  reduces he  negative  ontribution t c of  imports;  hus, oth  effects  ppear bove the  line ecause  both  have  positive  igns.  However, t b a a b s higher .S.  growth  boosts mports nd also  raises  nflation ich  offsets  ome of  the  dollar's  al U i a i wh s re depreciation.  iven  unchanged  nominal  interest tes,  igher nflation  so  lowers  U.S.  real hortG ra h i al s term  and  long-term nterest tes,  long  with  multiplier-accelerator  cts, ds  further  o  the  growth i ra a effe ad t of omestic  demand.  In  addition,  nflation    somewhat lower  abroad, urther  roding he  dollar's d i is f e t initial  al epreciation.  s a consequence, xports ake a progressively aller  ontribution    the re d A e m sm c to increased  rowth  of GDP,  and the  contribution   imports ecomes negative  n  late 997,  as  the  solid g of b i 1 red  bars hift  ign nd  are  shown below  the  line. n  1998, the  negative  nfluence  f  increased  mports s s a I i o i substantially  tweighs he  positive  ontribution   exports. he bottom  line  s  that,  n  each  of  the ou t c of T i i three ears  depicted,  eal DP  growth  is  boosted y one quarter  f  a percentage  oint y the  G-18 y r G b o p b dollar's  itial  al epreciation   4  percent. old that hought:  ill eturn  o  it  n  a few  minutes. in re d of H t Iw r t i

Chart  7 presents  ecent  rends  n  industrial  oduction  nd  consumer  prices  n  the  foreign  -7 r t i pr a i G countries.  s can  be seen  in  the ed  lines  n  the  various  anels,  ndustrial  oduction  ose  in  1994 in A r i p i pr r all f  these ountries.  More recently,  n  the  European  countries  nd Canada,  IP  has  leveled  ff r o c i a o o declined s  overall  conomic activity s  slowed  or  stagnated. n  Japan, roduction  as  picked  up a a e ha I p h bit n  recent  onths after  bout  a  year  of tagnation.  eanwhile, inflation s  been  subdued  in i m a s M ha Germany  and France, icked  up somewhat in  Italy  n  1995 and less o  in  the  United  Kingdom, but p i s declined n  Canada. In  Japan,  12-month changes  in  consumer  prices  ave  been  negative ince arly i h s e 1995.

The next  chart  epicts  ur  foreign  utlook. As presented  n  the  top  panel, iscal  nd d o o i f a monetary  policies  re ushing  in  opposite irections   the  foreign  ndustrial  untries.  Fiscal  olicy, a p d in i co p

the  left  anel, alibrated  changes  in  structural  dget  balances,  as  been  a restraining  rce ver p c by bu h fo o the  past wo-years n  all f  the  foreign  -7 countries cept or apan. (In rance,  the  restraint  d t i o G ex f J F di not  start til  995, and  it s  estimated  o  have  roughly ffset  he  ease  in  1994.) For  1996 and 1997, un 1 i t o t we  are  assuming  that iscal licy estraint  ll ontinue nd  even increase  n  each  of  these ountries. f po r wi c a i c In  Japan, he  fiscal  timulus  his ear  is  assumed  to  be  about  offset  n  1997. t s t y i

On the  other and,  with  respect  o  monetary  policy,  he  right  anel, eal hort-term  nd longh t t p r s a term  interest  tes  ave  been  declining  n average ince arly n  1995,  and  both  currently e ra h o s e i ar substantially  low  their  onger-term  rends. We  are  assuming  that he  decline n  real hort-term be l t t i s rates  ill ontinue hrough  this  ear  and  only  begin  to  reverse n  1997 once  the  resumption f rowth w c t y i o g is irmly stablished. f e

On balance, s  you can  see  in  the  top  three ines  n  the iddle-left  nel, e are  projecting a l i m pa w that  he  effects  f onetary  ease  will elp  to  more than ffset  he  effects  f iscal  estraint  d that t o m h o t o f r an growth  will ick p in  the  European  G-7 countries,   well  as  in  Japan  and  Canada.  Meanwhile, we p u as believe  hat rowth  has  resumed  in  Mexico,  although t ill e two  years efore he  effects  f  the t g i w b b t o 1995 recession  re  overcome. a The slight  ip  in  growth  in  the est  f atin merica  is  largely  he d r o L A t consequence  of  stagnation  n  Venezuela  and  slower  growth  in  Chile hat re  roughly ffset  y a i t a o b projected  ecovery n  Argentina. Growth in  Asian  countries  ther han  Japan  slows  a  bit  nder  the r i o t u influence  f  the  weaker  Japanese en  and  less xpansionary  onetary  policies. o y e m

The aggregate  utlook or oreign  rowth  is  presented  y the  red  bars  in  the  right  anel; o f f g b p growth  this  ear nd next s  projected  n average  to  be  substantially e than  in  the  United  States. y a i o mor This  factor  elps o  keep  the  expansion f ur  exports n  line ith  that f  our  imports. h t o o i w o

Meanwhile average  inflation    the  foreign  -7 countries, own in  the  bottom  panel, s in G sh i projected  o  remain  subdued.  The left  anel ndicates  hat PI inflation   these ountries ll t p i t C in c wi average  about  1-1/2 ercentage  oints  elow  projected  .S.  CPI inflation. e right  anel  presents p p b U Th p

projections r  the  individual untries; ly  in  Italy  s  inflation  pected o  exceed  inflation    the fo co on i ex t in United  States.

Foreign rowth,  of  course,  s  another rea f otential sk  o  our  overall  orecast.  Chart g i a o p ri t f 9 presents  ome analysis  f  the  extent f  that  isk. The top  panel  presents  wo estimates  f he s o o r t o t variation at an  be  introduced  nto ur  forecast  fluctuations    foreign  rowth.  The black  bars th c i o by in g are  the  annual  deviations om  average oreign  rowth  (Q4 to  Q4) over  the  past ight ears. Growth fr f g e y averaged  three ercent  er  year, nd  the  average  absolute  eviation  as seven  tenths  f  a  percentage p p a d w o point.  The red  bars re  our  errors  n  forecasting reign  rowth  a  year n  advance  (Q4 to  Q4). a i fo g i The mean error  as zero, ut  the  average  absolute  rror  as one  percentage  oint. w b e w p

The middle  panel  illustrates    implications r ur  outlook or  U.S.  growth  of n  error  qual the fo o f a e to  one  percentage  oint n  our  forecast r verage  foreign  rowth. The error  n  foreign  DP  is p i fo a g i G phased  in  over 1996 and  sustained  t  that  igher evel solid  ars) r  lower  level open  bars) uring a h l ( b o ( d 1997 and 1998. Again,  the  federal  unds  rate s eld  unchanged  in  the  simulation,  t  monetary f i h bu policies  broad  respond  endogenously. a

Taking  the  case  of ne-percentage  oint ore growth  abroad  during o p m 1996, as  shown by the solid ars,  he  initial  fect  s o  increase  he  contribution   xports o  real DP,  and there re b t ef i t t ofe t G a positive  ultiplier-accelerator  cts  s  well. Thus,  you can  see  in  the  chart hat  he  overall  oost o m effe a t t b t real GDP growth  exceeds  that  oming from  exports lone. More  U.S.  growth  raises  nflation.  n c a i I the  model simulation, S.  nominal  long-term  s  well  as  short-term terest  tes  re nchanged. U. a in ra a u Thus,  higher nflation  ads o  lower  real nterest  tes  n  the  United  States nd  further  timulates i le t i ra i a s domestic  demand. The permanently igher  level f  foreign conomic  activity  n  the  simulation es h o e i do cause  responses n  monetary  policy n  most  of  those ountries, ich  leads o  higher eal nterest  tes i i c wh t r i ra abroad.  Consequently,  he  dollar  epreciates mewhat in  real erms.  The depreciation uses  a t d so t ca further  timulus  o  the  growth  of .S.  real DP  from  exports,  ut  during s t U G b 1998 the  contribution of

those  higher xports  s  essentially  fset  y  the  higher mports nduced e i of b i i by the  faster  .S.  growth. As U long  as  the  nominal  federal  unds  rate s nchanged,  lower  U.S.  real nterest tes  ontinue o  boost f i u i ra c t growth  each  year  relative   the  baseline. to

The bottom  panel  provides   comparison  of he  effects  n U.S.  real DP  growth  of  errors  n a t o G i our  outlook or oreign  rowth  and  fluctuations    the  dollar. he specific mparison  is  between  one f f g in T o percent ore foreign  conomic activity,    just  llustrated,   the  effects  f  four ercent eal m e as i and o a p r depreciation   the of G-18 dollar  hat ere  presented  n  Chart  6. t w i ( I  promise  you that hart C 9 presents the  results ecisely   they  came out  of  the  computer!)  The hypothesized  ncrease  n  foreign  rowth pr as i i g initially  s  a  slightly ronger  nitial  fluence  n ha st i in o U.S. real rowth  than  the  dollar's  pothesized g hy depreciation,  t  the  effects  n  growth  of he  weaker  dollar  re arger  n bu o t a l i 1997. By  1998, the cumulative ifferential  the  effects  f he  two sources f  error  n  the d in o t o o level of U.S. real GDP is  less than  one tenth f  a  percentage  oint.  However, as  is  suggested o p by the  pair f  bars or he  second  half o f t of 1998, this  quivalence  reaks own  if he  simulations  re xtended  with  the olicy round  rules e b d t a e p g unchanged;  the  effects  n o U.S. economic activity   the  dollar's  preciation gin  to  wear off,  hile of de be w the  effects  f he  higher evel f  economic  activity road  continue o  cumulate  because f  ongoing o t l o ab t o decline n i U.S. real nterest tes. i ra

My final  hart resents  he  results  f   longer-term  cenario  n  which  the ollar  s ssumed  to c p t o a s i d i a depreciate  teadily  uring s d 1996 to  2000,  for xample  because  of  an  increase  n  the  risk  remium on e i p U.S. assets  ssociated  ith  a  perceived  eed  to  reduce  our  current  ccount eficit d  slow  the rowth a w n a d an g of  our  net  international bilities.  e depreciation mulates o  an  amount sufficient    narrow  the lia Th cu t to U.S. current  ccount eficit  2  percent f a d by o GDP. The simulation  mploys the  same Greenbook e baseline  xtended  to  the  year 002 that  as used  for he  simulations esented  n  the  Bluebook.  Two e 2 w t pr i alternative  sumptions re  made about  Federal eserve  monetary  policy:  either  eal as a R r GDP is  held close o  its aseline  ath  or  the rice evel  s  held  close o  its aseline. t b p p l i t b

The bottom  panel  shows that hort-term  eal nterest tes ould have  to  rise onsiderably  o s r i ra w c t contain he  effects  n the  U.S.  economy  of he  dollar's  preciation.  In  the  case  of DP  targeting, t o t de G real hort-term  nterest  tes  ave  to  rise n  order o  prevent eal DP  from  rising  aster  han  is s i ra h i t r G f t assumed in  the  baseline. he increase  eaks  at our  percentage  oints n  the  year  2000. In  the  case T p f p i of  price-level  rgeting, al hort-term  nterest  tes  ave to  rise  wice  as  much  in  order o  counteract ta re s i ra h t t the  direct  nd  indirect fects  n  the rice evel f he  dollar's  preciation. n  presenting  hese ast a ef o p l o t de I t l simulations,   point s  not  to  suggest hat he  dollar  s  likely  o  be  afflicted   a  sustained  out  of my i t t i t by b depreciation.  ather  it s  to  illustrate   extent  o  which  external  actors  hould  be  included mong R i the t f s a those  that an  affect  he  so-called utral,  r  equilibrium, al hort-term te f  interest. c t ne o re s ra o

Having  caused  enough  trouble  nd  confusion,    will urn ur  presentation  er  to  Larry a I t o ov Slifman.

Lawrence Slifman January 30. 1996

FOMC Chart Show Presentation --  Consumer Sector

A  critical element in  the forecast for domestic final demand is the consumer sector. In  particular, Governor Lindsey and  others have raised questions about the scope for growth of  consumer spending in light of the level of household debt. The upper panel of chart 11 shows the upward march of the household debt-income ratio over the past decade. This increase has had a  tempering influence on our thinking about the outlook for consumption. But, for a number of reasons, we  still expect consumer demand to  be well maintained during the projection period.

First, despite the extraordinary level of  the debt-income ratio, debt service requirements--the middle left panel--remain below their previous highs. This is true when calculated either relative to the standard measure of disposable personal income or  when measured relative to  the staff's estimate of  cash income--that is, DPI excluding the imputed income components (such as the flow of services from owner-occupied housing) and  adjusted for pension sector flows. I should note that the cash income line is drawn using pre-revision national income accounts data, because the detailed revised data needed for this calculation are not yet available. In  any event, the chart suggests that lower interest rates have allowed households to take on  more debt in  the past few  years without a  commensurate crimp in their budgets.

Moreover, though people have been using plastic in  an unprecedented way, their overall borrowing has not been extraordinary. As shown in  the middle right panel, the flow of consumer credit relative to  spending has been in  line with what typically has happened when purchases of  durables were cyclically strong.

On  the other side of  the household balance sheet, we have often pointed to  the huge run-up in  the stock market over the  past year as  a  supporting factor for PCE. As illustrated in the lower right panel, the associated rise in the value of  household assets has more than offset the rise in  indebtedness. Standard economic theory, and  much empirical research, suggests that this rise in  net  worth relative to income should be  a  sustaining force on  consumer spending during the  projection period.

Nevertheless, it  has been argued that the  improvement in  aggregate net worth masks important features of individual household balance sheets and consumer behavior that could have important implications for the outlook. This is the subject of the next chart

One argument against simply looking at  aggregate net worth is the fact that individuals do  not have direct or ready access to  all of  the corporate equities in  the household sector account, and, accordingly, cannot use the capital gains on  those less accessible assets to  support their current consumption. However, as illustrated in the upper panel of  chart 12, we  estimate that individuals

directly own about two-thirds of  the corporate equities in the household sector account, and  roughly the  same share of last year's capital gains. In addition, at least some portion of  the capital gains on  indirectly held equities could be  liquified--for example, by  taking out a  loan against the  assets in  401(k) plans. Indeed, a  recent trade association survey showed that one-third of  401(k) plan participants had  outstanding loans from their plans in  1994. Finally, even without access, households can  spend more of their current income knowing that their retirement nest egg has grown. All in  all, our  view is that the recent rise in the stock market has created a  sizable pool of  capital gains for the household sector that could be  used to  support consumption.

It is also argued that the effects of  changes in aggregate net worth on  consumption may  be  muted if  the assets are owned primarily by  the rich and  the liabilities held primarily by  the poor, and  if the rich and  poor have different saving propensities or face different liquidity constraints. The middle panel presents data from the 1992 Survey of  Consumer Finances that are  intended to  shed some light on this issue. There are a  lot of  numbers in  this table that you  can  peruse at  your leisure, but let me  make three points: First, the poor do  not hold a disproportionate amount of debt. As  may be seen by comparing columns 2  and 3 with column 1, upper income families hold a  disproportionate share of  both assets and.

liabilities. My  second point: debt payment burdens--column 4--are highest, on  average, not for the poor but for  middle income households. Although it is not shown on this table, these households typically have assets that are two or three times larger than their incomes. Thus, it is likely that most of these households would be  able to  meet their monthly debt service requirements for some time should they face a disruption to  their income. Indeed, as  shown in  column 5,  a sizable share of these households have sufficient financial assets to completely pay  off their debts if need be. My third point adds a  cautionary note. Column 6 shows the percentage of  households that reported in  1992 that they did no  saving in the  preceding year--that is, they spent all or more than all of  their income. As  you can see, the percentage not saving was extremely high for the lower income groups. These data suggest that a  sizable portion of the  population has little financial cushion or is subject to potential liquidity constraints and  might face serious economic stress should their income flows be  disrupted.

Normally, one  might think of  a  recession as creating such a  circumstance. But the much discussed flux in  the job market may  be  creating an  abnormal number of dislocations. Some observers have suggested that this is a  factor behind the recent upturn in  loan delinquency rates. Moreover, creditors have begun to suffer from the increased bankruptcies and charge-offs shown in the lower left panel.

Although it is often stated that the losses are  not unexpected and  quite manageable, given the gross margins on consumer loans, in  our latest surveys lenders are  becoming concerned. Fewer banks have expressed an  increased willingness to  make consumer loans. In  addition, some lenders report they are tightening underwriting standards for such loans. Overall, we're not expecting a  serious credit supply problem, but  we  do  anticipate some further tightening.

In  our forecast we  have, in  effect, let the negative influence of  rising indebtedness offset the positive influence of the rise in  wealth, leaving the average level of the saving rate over the  next two  years at  about its 1995 level. But, while the latest signals from the consumer sector don't seem to support the view, we  would still suggest that the run-up in  the stock market and  the new opportunities for  mortgage refinancing do  give an  upside bias to the risks attending our forecast of spending propensities.

Another important element in  our forecast is  the growth of  capital spending--chart 13. Here, the question is whether, after the run-up in  business fixed investment in recent years, the capital stock has grown so  large relative to  output and  labor that there simply is  not much  room left for further growth without creating redundant plant and equipment. The  lack of  revised capital stock data from BEA

and  only limited detail on  the components of  business fixed investment, make it difficult to address this issue fully. But, using the data we  do  have, it does not appear unrealistic to anticipate at least some further moderate gains in spending.

As seen in  the upper panel, the growth of  real equipment outlays during the current investment boom, now estimated to  have been 11.2 percent at an  annual rate, far outpaced the rate of increase in  the 1980s expansion. In our forecast, we  see equipment gains slowing dramatically from the earlier rate--but, at 3-1/4 percent on  average over the next two  years, equipment spending growth still is an important driver of GDP expansion. The disaggregation shown on  lines 2-4 indicates that we  still expect solid advances in the computer sector, albeit slower than the torrid pace of earlier years, while spending for  industrial equipment is likely to fall back.

Some less optimistic analysts point to the historical relationship between PDE  and capacity utilization (the middle left panel), and  note that the recent rate of investment is far out of  line with the decline in utilization. The inference they draw from this chart is that the incentive to invest in  new equipment during the next year or  two will be  greatly diminished, and  that PDE will be  a  drag on  growth.

We  think this inference is too broad. As shown in  the middle right panel, capacity utilization is more closely related to the  narrower investment category of industrial equipment. The reason, of  course, is that a  large share of the spending for other types of  equipment is  made by nonmanufacturing firms. For example, more than three-fourths of  business computer outlays are by nonmanufacturing firms. As can  be  seen in  the  chart, our projection of  the industrial equipment component of  PDE matches closely our factory utilization forecast.

Turning to the computer sector, the lower left panel shows that we  are forecasting a  deceleration of  spending that would return the level of  investment to  about its longrun trend. However, the  recent decline in  the semiconductor book-to-bill ratio and  reports of  lower-than-expected fourth-quarter profits in  the computer industry raise the question of  whether computer investment has played out, with future gains limited primarily to replacement demand rather than additional large-scale expansion of  the  net stock. In shaping our  projection, we  recognize this as  a  possible downside risk. Nonetheless, the staff, like the folks in the industry who are  betting real money on  the outcome (the lower right panel), expect 1996 to be  another year of  hefty gains for computers. Furthermore, recall that the quality

improvements that will occur in 1996--for example, more powerful Pentium chips in the typical unit--will be  scored by  BEA as a  price decline. This implies that these industry forecasts of  unit PC  sales underestimate by  perhaps 10 percentage points the  growth of  real computer investment as reported in  the national income accounts.

Dave Stockton will continue our  presentation.

FOMC Chart Show Presentation --  Inflation Outlook

Your next chart highlights some key features of  our inflation projection. As  Mike noted earlier, we are projecting increases in total and core CPI to average just a  shade below 3  percent over the next two years. In contrast to the pattern of  the first half of  the 1990s, we do not anticipate much, if  any, help from food and energy prices this year or next.

Under our assumption of normal harvests, food prices--shown in  the middle left panel--are projected to rise nearly 3  percent in 1996 and 1997. Stocks of  major grains currently are very low  and the risks to our projection probably are asymmetric. Another major crop failure could be  quite damaging.

Energy prices--the middle right panel--were weak for most of the second half of  last year, but have recently received a considerable boost from unseasonable weather and tight supplies. We are expecting a  jump in retail energy prices early this year, followed by  only small increases after that.

Materials prices--the lower left panel--surged from late 1993 into early last year, as capacity utilization rates rose steeply. With U.S. and global demand having slackened, these price increases ground to a  halt in  the second half of  last year, and continued sluggishness in  the industrial sector should further depress prices early this year. The benefits of  this negative "speed" effect and the lower non-oil import prices projected to  accompany the strengthened dollar are the principal factors behind the dip in  core inflation that we have projected for this year.

As usual, the broader contours of  our inflation outlook are shaped less by  these largely transitory influences and more importantly by our assessment of  the underlying trends of aggregate demand and supply. Turning to  the supply side of  our forecast--the subject of  your next chart--the revised GDP accounts held few surprises relevant for our view of  potential output growth. As  we had anticipated, the shift to chain-type measures of real output knocked about 1/2 percentage point off our estimate of  potential growth. We now  calculate the growth in  potential output to  have been a  little less than 2  percent per annum since the previous business cycle peak, and we do  not foresee any  major deviation from that pace over the next two years.

The component of potential growth that has shown the largest break from earlier trends has been labor input--line 2  of  the table. Of  the 0.6 percentage point deceleration in potential labor input between the 1980s and the 1990s, about 0.2 percentage point reflects slower growth of  the working-age population. The remainder is accounted for by  a  virtual halt in the 1990s in  the 25-year uptrend in labor force participation--displayed in  the lower left panel. Although no single factor is capable of fully explaining this abrupt shift in  trend, much of  the flattening is attributable to the absence of  further increases in participation among women aged 20 to 44,  whose labor market behavior has been approaching that of  men. With the participation rate having shown no  trend over the past five years, despite a  good supply of  employment opportunities, we  see little reason to anticipate any perceptible upward tilt over the next two years.

Productivity based on  the revised chain-weight measure of output--the middle panel--looks to have been running at about a  1.1 percent annual rate since the previous business cycle peak. not much different from the underlying pace observed since the early 1970s.

A number of  you have raised concerns about whether the BEA's measures of  real output are capturing reality. And, there certainly are ample grounds for questioning the statistics. But, whether or not BEA's estimate of real GDP is accurate. Okun's Law--shown as a  scatter diagram in  the lower right panel--suggests that growth in  measured GDP above 2  percent, on  average, has been associated with declining margins of  slack--consistent with our estimate of  potential growth.

Turning to your next chart, with the unemployment rate having stabilized at 5.6 percent over the past year--at the low  end of  most estimates of  the natural rate--some commentators have suggested that inflation has behaved surprisingly well. Indeed, the Blue Chip forecast of  a  year ago correctly predicted the average unemployment rate, but anticipated a  rise in  the CPI to 3.3 percent. That consensus forecast has now fallen to 2.8 percent. We, too, revised down a  bit our forecast of  CPI inflation, but we did so in the context of a  slightly higher-than-expected unemployment rate.

While forecasts came down last year, underlying price inflation moved up. As  may be seen in the upper right panel, the runup in the PPI for finished goods excluding food and energy was particularly pronounced. But even the core CPI accelerated 0.2 percentage point over the past year and roughly 0.3 percentage point taking into account the technical improvements in the CPI that went into effect last January.

Our price and wage models provide another vehicle for addressing the question of whether inflation was surprisingly low last year. The middle panel presents the recent behavior of  a  basic reduced-form price equation, which makes core CPI inflation a  function of  lagged price inflation, the relative prices of food and energy, the unemployment rate, and the change in the unemployment rate. As you can see, an  out-of-sample dynamic simulation of  this model--the red line--has described very well the behavior of  core inflation over the past three years.

The same cannot be said for the behavior of  private compensation per hour, as  measured by the ECI. A  standard Phillips curve type equation, which uses lagged price inflation, the unemployment rate, and the change in the unemployment rate to explain ECI compensation per hour, is shown in  the lower panel. The equation estimated through the third quarter of  1992 and simulated forward--the red line--initially underpredicted wage inflation, but began to consistently overpredict beginning in 1994.

One  hypothesis about the subdued behavior of  wage inflation is that the unemployment rate may be overstating the degree of tautness in  labor markets relative to past experience. As shown by the red line in  the upper panel of  your next chart, the ECI accelerated in the late 1980s when the unemployment rate fell below 6 percent--the light shaded area--but has failed to do so recently.

The lower two panels present some alternative measures of labor market conditions. The middle panel presents the Conference Board's index of  help-wanted advertising, a  measure of job vacancies. Like the unemployment rate, help-wanted advertising--the black line-has been roughly stable over the past year, but at a  level below that

observed in  the 1988-90 period. However, the increasing use of personnel supply agencies to  meet fluctuations in labor demand may  be leading to a  diminished reliance on  help-wanted advertising to fill vacancies. We  make an adjustment to the help-wanted series for the trend in employment at personnel supply agencies--an alternative technology for matching workers with vacancies. Our adjusted measure -- the red line--is just a  bit below the highs reached in  the late 1980s.

The bottom panel plots the job situation as  viewed by households. There are fewer households reporting that jobs are plentiful relative to  those reporting that jobs are hard to get than was the case in  the late 1980s. Although the difference is not large, it could be taken as some evidence in support of the view  that negative perceptions of labor market conditions by  workers are holding down wage demands and resulting in  lower compensation gains than  would be expected at a  5-1/2 percent unemployment rate.

Although both of  these measures hint at the possibility of  a somewhat softer labor market than portrayed by  the unemployment rate, neither, when employed in a  standard wage equation is capable of explaining the extent of the deceleration in  compensation last year.

As we have noted previously, the slowing in compensation per hour last year was almost entirely in the benefits component--the black line in  the upper panel of chart 18--with a  notable fraction of that deceleration accounted for by  the costs of  health benefits. To be sure, in principle, workers and firms should be concerned about the total compensation package. If firms are simply shifting the costs of health care benefits to  workers, then workers should be attempting to recoup these losses in the form of  higher wages. However, many

stories suggest that firms are also extracting concessions from health care insurers and providers, and encouraging or  forcing workers into managed care arrangements. To  the extent that these efforts are creating efficiency gains or cost reductions without altering substantially the quantity or quality of health care available to workers, firms may, at least for a  time, be able to capture the benefits in  the form of  lower compensation costs. Our forecast assumes that this process will be continuing over the next two years, but that the opportunities for significant cost savings will gradually diminish.

With increases in labor costs having remained subdued relative to prices, the implicit markup--shown in  the middle panel for the nonfinancial corporate sector--has trended up over the past few years to a  level nearly a  percentage point above its longer-term average. The  markup usually moves back down toward trend when productivity slows or compensation accelerates. Because these developments are not present in our current projection, we are forecasting the price markup to remain near its recent level.

The lower panel lays out schematically the risks to our price forecast posed by our compensation and. markup projections, and attaches a  rough order of  magnitude to the inflation consequences of these risks. Of course, the possibilities highlighted in  this table far from exhaust the  myriad ways in  which we  could err in  our inflation projection over the next two years. For this reason, rather than impart a  false sense of precision. I  have confined myself to integers. The upper left quadrant of the diagram depicts the assumptions underlying the staff forecast--growth in  compensation per hour remains about one percentage point below historical

relationships, while the markup remains about one percentage point above its historical average. Obviously, we place the highest probability on  this outcome.

But, another possible outcome would be for the growth of hourly compensation and the markup to return to "normal" implying about one percentage point faster growth in  hourly compensation and a decline in  the markup of a  similar amount. These offsetting influences would leave core CPI around our projected pace of  3 percent, albeit with a  different distribution of  income.

A  less favorable outcome--the 4  percent core CPI shown in  the lower left quadrant--could result from an  acceleration of  hourly compensation back to the  model's prediction, while the  markup remains near current levels. And, a  more favorable outcome than our projection--the core CPI of  about 2  percent shown in  the upper right quadrant--could occur if  the markup is forced by competitive pressures back to its historical average, while hourly compensation growth remains subdued. Of  course, the actual risks to  the inflation projection lie along a  continuum, but the plus or  minus one percentage point range highlighted by this table probably is a  good representation of  a  95 percent confidence interval over the next two years.

Finally, for those of  you who are still conscious after this mind numbing presentation, the last chart presents your forecasts for 1996. In  brief, the central tendency of your projection for real GDP anticipates a  small acceleration in activity this year. Although revised down a  bit from  your July projections, central tendencies for both inflation and the unemployment rate are projected to be at or above 1995 levels. At this stage, the Administration has not issued

an  economic projection, but the current schedule calls for release of their forecast in  February.

..........

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)  CLASS I-FOMC

Material r fo

Staff esentation    the Pr to Federal  pen  Market ommittee O C

January 30,  1996

Recent  Indicators

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Retail  ales Ex. Autos S

Billions   dollars of

<!-- missing-text -->

Inventory-Sales  atio R

<!-- missing-text -->

Light ehicle  Sales

V

<!-- missing-text -->

Manufacturing rders O

<!-- missing-text -->

Forecast Summary

<!-- missing-text -->

Unemployment

Rate

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer Price  Indexes

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Financial  Market  Conditions

Real Interest  ates* R

<!-- missing-text -->

GDP

Gap  and  2-Year Lag of  Real Funds  Rate

<!-- missing-text -->

owner's  quivalent  ent  onsistently  roughout  istory.

e

r

c

th

h

Bank Business Lending Policies

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- *Adjusted  or  examiner atings. f r

<!-- missing-text -->

Chart  4

Fiscal  Policy  Outlook

Fiscal ssumptions A -Billions   Dollars f  Deficit  eduction,  Relative o  OBRA-93 of o R t Path

<!-- missing-text -->

High Employment Budget  Deficit

<!-- missing-text -->

Fiscal mpetus

I

<!-- missing-text -->

Summary of  the  Outlook:  External Sector

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Exchange Rates

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Weighted average  against  foreign G-10 countries,  adjusted by relative onsumer c prices.
- * Difference between rates  on long-term U.S. 10-year government bond  and  a weighted  average  of  foreign  G-10 benchmark government bonds, adjusted for  expected  inflation.

<!-- missing-text -->

*Error is  difference  between actual  change  and  forecast  made

one  year earlier.

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Change  is  phased  in  over  four uarters f q o 1996 and held  at ew  level  or n f 1997 and 1998.
- * Change  in  percent  contribution to GDP

Foreign Industrial roduction and  Consumer P Prices

(3-month  moving averages)

<!-- missing-text -->

Foreign Outlook

Fiscal olicy* P

G-10 Interest tes Ra

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Change in  structural  vernment  budget alances go b percent of  GDP calendar  ear  basis y

Real GDP

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer  prices

4-quarter ercent  change p

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- ** U.S. nonagricultural  merchandise export  weights.
- *  Excludes  mortgage interest ayments. p

<!-- missing-text -->

Risks  to  the  Forecast

Foreign  Growth:  Projection  rror E and Actual Deviation from 1988-1995 Average*

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Percent

1996;  foreign at igher  lower)  evel  or

h

(

l

f

1997

and

1998.

Change

*  Change  phased in  over

GDP  held

*

in percent  contribution   GDP

to

<!-- missing-text -->

External Pressures  on Short-Term  Interest  Rates

Baseline:

Greenbook forecast  xtended  to  2002 e

Monetary Policy  Assumptions:

- (a) Real GDP held  close  to  baseline
- (b) Price  level eld  close  to  baseline h

Alternative  cenario: S

Dollar  depreciates  during  1996-2000  by an amount  sufficient    narrow the U.S. current to account deficit  2 percent  of  GDP by

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Federal  funds  rate less inflation  ver  previous  our  quarters. o f

Household Financial  Condition

<!-- missing-text -->

Corporate  Equities eld H by Households

<!-- missing-text -->

- *  Corporate equities  held through defined contribution  pension  plans, variable  annuities, IRA/Keoghs, and personal trusts. ** ncludes I corporate equity  held by direct  household  ownership of mutual  fund shares.

(Percent  of  all  ouseholds) h

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Ratio f  debt ayments  to ncome o p i for households  ith  debt w
- 2.  Percent  f  families th  debt n ach  income group  whose financial sets  re reater an r  equal o  their  on-mortgage ebt. o wi i e as a g th o t n d

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Average  growth  rate  rom  cyclical  rough n f t i PDE  (1982:Q4) to  cyclical  eak  (1989:Q3). p
- 2. Average  growth  rate  rom  cyclical ough n f tr i PDE  (1992:Q1) to 1995:Q3.

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Growth  for he  entire ndustry,  ot  individual  ompany. t i n c

Chart  14 Staff Inflation Outlook

Consumer Price  Index

<!-- missing-text -->

Potential  Output

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Nonfarm business  ector.
- 2. Technical  actors  nclude: e atio f i th r of  GDP to the output  f  the  onfarm business  ector; e atio  f  nonfarm business o n s th r o employment  to ousehold mployment;  and  rounding rror. h e e

Nonfarm  Productivity

<!-- missing-text -->

Has  Inflation  een B Surprisingly ow? L

Revisions to  Forecast for 1995

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Q4  to  Q4  percent  change.
- 2. Annual average.

<!-- missing-text -->

CPI Excluding  Food  and Energy

<!-- missing-text -->

Employment  Cost Index*

Percent  hange, nnual  rate c a

<!-- missing-text -->

- *  Spliced  with  hourly onfarm business  compensation prior  o n t 1980:Q2.

Labor Market  Conditions

Civilian  nemployment U Rate

<!-- missing-text -->

Help Wanted  Advertising

<!-- missing-text -->

**

Adjusted  additionally  r fo

trend in  employment  at ersonnel  supply  agencies.

p

Job Availability

<!-- missing-text -->

Labor Compensation and the Price Markup

Employment Cost Indexes

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

ECONOMIC PROJECTIONS FOR 1996

<!-- missing-text -->

n.a. Not applicable.

NOTE: Central  tendencies  constructed by dropping  top  and bottom three  from distribution.

Long-run Ranges David E.  Lindsey

The  basic issue facing the Committee today regarding the monetary ranges would seem to  be  whether or  not to raise them to  better align them  with the  probable outcome. The table on  page 11 of  the bluebook shows staff projections of  money, debt, and  nominal GDP. The Greenbook sees nominal GDP growing at 4-1/2 percent this year on  the baseline assumption of  an  unchanged federal funds rate. Regarding M2, even with short-term opportunity costs little changed, we  think that growth of  this aggregate will be  boosted some relative to GDP expansion by  a  slightly flatter yield curve this year than last. With liquid balances thus more attractive relative to longer-term investments, we're projecting a  speedup of  M2 growth in  1996 to 5-1/4 percent, from its 4-1/4 percent pace last year. The implied decline in  the velocity of  M2 we're projecting, about 1/2 percentage point, follows no  change in  V2 last year.

For  M3, we  foresee a  slight moderation from last year's 6 percent pace to 5-3/4 percent this year. While depository credit growth is  expected to  slow somewhat more quickly, the  elimination last December of  FDIC insurance premiums for well-capitalized banks should heighten their willingness to issue wholesale deposits, providing some support to  M3 growth.

The  slowdown in  depository credit mirrors the deceleration we foresee in  domestic nonfinancial debt. We  think consumer credit growth will be  moderated by  restrained consumer durable spending. Business borrowing also should ease off this year as inventory investment slows.

Growth of  debt of 4-1/2 percent is  projected to match that of  nominal GDP.

As shown at the top of  page 14 in  the bluebook, debt growth also matches that of nominal GDP in  the  projections that assume an easier or tighter policy stance. Under all three projections for this year, the growth of  debt runs in the middle portion of the 3-to-7 percent provisional debt range chosen by  the Committee last July, shown in  the column labeled alternative I. Accordingly, in  the  next two columns, which give alternative ranges, we  have retained the 3-to-7 percent debt range.

The staff projections shown for  M2 and  M3 are less well aligned  with the Committee's provisional ranges. Under the  baseline projection of a  5-1/2 percent funds rate, M2  would run  a  bit above the 5 percent upper bound, while projected M3 growth nearly reaches its 6 percent upper bound. Easier policy, by  reducing opportunity costs and raising nominal income, would be  even more likely to  produce M2 and  M3 outside the provisional ranges.

To  clearly encompass the staff baseline projections, an  upward adjustment to  the provisional ranges for  M2 and  M3 of 1 percentage point would be  needed, as in  alternative II. To center approximately the staff baseline projections around their midpoints, the upper and lower bounds of the  provisional ranges need to  be  raised by  2  percentage  points, as in  alternative III.

In  presenting the rationales for each of  the three alternative ranges, the bluebook did  not counsel reemphasizing M2 and  M3 as intermediate targets or  even as information variables helping to  guide the policy stance. To be sure, major and  persistent deviations of  money growth from  expectations would need to  be  examined for whatever light

they might shed on  the credit intermediation process and  the economic outlook, as was done during the credit-crunch episode in the early 1990s. And, in the past couple of  years, M2  and M3 have behaved, on average, more in  line with historical patterns. Even so, we  believe that much  more experience would be  needed regarding the  behavior of  the broad aggregates in  a  variety of  circumstances before seriously contemplating an  upgrading of  their policy role.

Indeed, uncertainty about intermediate-term M2  behavior is  the main reason the Committee established its provisional l-to-5 percent range for  this year last July. Rather than bracketing the most likely growth of  M2 this year, this range was intended to serve as  a  benchmark for secular M2 growth under conditions of  price stability with the resumption of a  stable long-run average V2. That range, centered on  3 percent, then would accommodate 2  percent growth in  real potential output along with a  1 percent trend in  measured inflation. The Committee in  choosing this range indicated in its report that M2 growth near the upper bound this year could prove consistent with the Committee's expectations for nominal GDP. If the FOMC instead wished to  use the announced ranges to communicate to  the  public the likely growth of broad money in  the current year associated with its expectations for macroeconomic outcomes, then alternative I would seem to  be  too low.

Your expectations for the economy are not indicative of intentions to  hold down growth in  nominal GDP to rates that would produce money growth in the alternative I  ranges. Rather, they are similar to  the Greenbook baseline forecast. The 1 percent higher ranges of alternative II, at a minimum, hence would be  required to clearly encompass the growth of  broad money likely to  be  consistent with  your economic outlook. Money would be in  the upper portion of their alternative II ranges, but this may be  an  attractive attribute, if the  Committee wishes to  communicate its intention to resist surprises to  nominal GDP and  inflation more vigorously if they are on  the upside than on  the downside. In such circumstances, as consistent with an  "opportunistic" approach to  price shocks, the aggregates would be likely to  deviate from expectations by  more in  a negative direction than in a positive direction. Hence, the  point expectation for money growth absent surprises could legitimately run above the midpoint of the  annual range.

Alternative III  better centers the staff baseline projections for  M2 and  M3  around the midpoints of the ranges. This alternative thus might be  preferred if the Committee wished the ranges to  be oriented toward conveying expectations of  the money growth in  the current year consistent with economic projections. Such reasoning in favor of this alternative would be  strengthened to the extent you thought that significant further policy easings this year  would be needed to achieve the Committee's projected economic outcome, in contrast to the Greenbook analysis. Such easings would additionally bolster anticipated money growth relative to  the staff baseline projections.

Policy Alternatives Briefing Donald L. Kohn

As background for your decision today, I  thought it might be useful to say a few  words about policymaking in the face of economic uncertainty. Policymakers always complain about "unusual uncertainties", but those complaints might have particular merit at the current moment: In addition to the  usual questions about the factors affecting spending, key data have been delayed, both the shortand long-run fiscal prospects are particularly murky, and the behavior of costs and prices has raised the possibility that the inflation process has changed in  a  fundamental manner.

Much of  this can be translated--albeit very loosely--into uncertainty about the equilibrium real interest rate. In practice, the odds are pretty high that any particular estimate of the equilibrium funds rate will be off the mark significantly, partly because changing economic conditions imply a continually shifting equilibrium. The exercise in chart 3 of the bluebook, which is reproduced as the first exhibit in the package labelled "Monetary Policy Briefing", was intended to address the consequences of misjudging the equilibrium real rate. The upper panel shows what happens to inflation if  the Committee holds the  nominal funds rate along a  predetermined path--the baseline--when the underlying real rate has in fact shifted.

Two inferences can be drawn from this panel. One is that evidence of  movements in equilibrium rates or errors in judgment may  be  very slow to emerge. We  have posited a large shift in the equilibrium rate, but in  the fourth quarter after the change, inflation rates diverge from baseline by only .2 percent. To be  sure, there is likely to be collateral evidence that underlying conditions are diverging from expectations. For example, an  unexpected shift in  demand that changed the equilibrium rate would be  reflected in the unemployment rate as  well as in inflation; but even for our sizable shock, deviations in the  unemployment rate are small enough after a year to  be  within a reasonable range of  uncertainty about the true value of  the NAIRU. Moreover, changes in supply, rather than demand, that shifted equilibrium rates would be  detectable primarily through the behavior of  inflation itself. The second inference is that, after a  while, the costs of  holding the nominal funds rate at the  wrong level escalate rapidly, as unanticipated inflation outcomes push the real rate further from its new equilibrium.

In the lower two panels, we  assumed that the Committee recognizes the problem after a  year and responds to bring the inflation rate back to its baseline by  the end of the simulation period. To do that, the nominal funds rate must be increased or decreased quite substantially to take account of the change in the equilibrium rate, the effects

of  the temporary increase or decrease in inflation on the realized real rate, and the effects of the recognition lag. That lag has meant that there was a period of inadvertent stimulus or restraint; if inflation is to be returned to its original path, policy actions must compensate by overshooting equilibrium for a  while.

We recognize that the illustrated reaction to a downward shock doesn't make much sense in  the context of the Committee's price stability objective. If  instead, the Committee were following an "opportunistic" disinflation strategy, policy ease would be less pronounced, so that the Committee could lock in  the unanticipated, but  nonetheless welcome, disinflation in  train. In preparing the bluebook, we  had problems simulating this response in  the full staff model. We tried it  with more success in  the MPS model, which has a less complex and complete foreign sector, and the results are shown in  the upper panel of  your next exhibit. After the initial lag, the funds rate under opportunism, shown by  the long dashed line, is taken down to about its new equilibrium value to put the economy back at its potential. As you can see from the lower panel, under this strategy, inflation levels out at a  new, lower rate.

When starting with some inflation, the asymmetrical response to shocks inherent in an opportunistic strategy will produce higher average real interest rates over time as the economy is hit by  both positive and negative shocks. It

is these higher real rates that eventually produce price stability. Compared to a  deliberate disinflation strategy, under most circumstances, opportunism would produce lower real rates and a longer path to price stability. The average level of rates and the time to price stability under opportunism depends on the nature of the shocks hitting the economy. Larger and more frequent shocks imply a  faster track to price stability, because the Committee has more opportunities to respond asymmetrically.

Another shortcoming of the simulations shown in the bluebook is the lack of  a  forward-looking bond market in  the model. The single panel in  Exhibit 3  illustrates--once again using the MPS model--the effects of different assumptions about the bond market on the policy response to an upward shock to aggregate demand. Because the bond market anticipates your actions, long-term rates rise to the levels needed to counter the inflation impulse with much less movement in the federal funds rate. Your responses can be more measured, though ultimately of course you  must raise rates to offset the inadvertent stimulus and take account of the higher equilibrium. I  haven't shown the simulation, but the effects of  forward-looking markets are especially striking when those markets are adjusting now to a future change in the equilibrium funds rate--say because of a legislated, but delayed, fiscal policy initiative. In  these circumstances, models will frequently give seemingly perverse

policy prescriptions--for example to ease in the face of  a tax cut  when such a cut scheduled several years in  the future raises bond rates. While one wouldn't want to take such a result too seriously, it does highlight the difficulty in determining the current equilibrium funds rate when markets are reacting to prospective developments.

It is difficult to draw clearcut lessons from these stylized exercises for the conduct of  monetary policy. One reason, as noted in  the first point on the next page, is that there are several types of uncertainties complicating the conduct of monetary policy. The simulations dealt with just one, the level of  the real equilibrium rate, because that seems to encapsulate the sorts of "unusual uncertainties" now facing the Committee. But a second broad type of uncertainty concerns the transmission of  policy--that is, the response of  the economy to a change in interest rates. Vice Chairman Blinder often cited this in discussing the case for cautious monetary policy actions. Although in concept, and in very simple models, the two types of  uncertainties might be separable, in fact they probably interact in  complex ways; it wouldn't be surprising if an increase in uncertainty about the level of the right rate was accompanied by  greater uncertainty about how the economy would react to an actual rate adjustment.

Nonetheless, I think the simulations did leave a few tentative lessons behind, which may  be applicable to the

current situation of uncertainty about the level of the equilibrium rate. One is that slow reactions to changed circumstances risk policy errors that can  be difficult and costly to reverse--in the parlance of  the FOMC, sluggish policy risks "getting behind the curve". Even when uncertainty about the equilibrium real rate has increased, policymakers need to form a  judgment about whether the equilibrium has shifted, and then, if necessary, make at least some adjustment. The simulations showed that it may take a  while for definitive evidence to emerge, and that waiting until one is quite confident that an  action is called for can too easily result in accumulated inflation pressures or economic weakness that would ultimately require much stronger policy action to correct.

In  making its judgment about the equilibrium real rate, the Committee would need to consider whether changes in  uncertainty haven't affected the equilibrium rate itself. Bond markets that are more uncertain tend to build in  higher liquidity premiums--and we  may a  have seen a  bit of this in recent weeks as expected volatility rose. Spenders facing greater uncertainty about jobs or about government support might tend to cut back a  bit on purchases if they are risk averse, saving more for the heightened possibility of a rainy day.

Another lesson of  the simulations is that a  bond market that correctly anticipates the Committee's actions

can play a  helpful stabilizing role, allowing the Committee to move cautiously, at least for a time. But, for the "bond market vigilantes" to be helpful, they need to understand the Committee's ultimate intentions so they can take a reasonable guess at its actions under various circumstances. To the extent the Committee can clarify its objectives, it will at least raise the odds that financial markets will reinforce rather than undercut achieving those objectives.

Moreover, greater uncertainty implies the need for flexibility in policy making. The difficulties of gauging the appropriate rate at any point in time and the likelihood that circumstances will change suggest that policy adjustments may need to be frequent. And those adjustments might involve shifting course without necessarily having eased or tightened a great deal. To be sure, frequent small adjustments in policy, including course reversals, may be  difficult to explain to the public and could confuse markets about Federal Reserve objectives and strategies. But those costs would have to be  weighed against the benefits of reducing the odds on persistent policy misalignments.

Finally, an opportunistic strategy entails a particular kind of  flexibility--stronger reactions to possible increases in inflation than to possible decreases. In  effect, this is what the Committee has been doing for the last 10 or  more years--responding promptly and forcefully to possibilities that inflation could rise and more cautiously

and by less to the possibility that inflation might fall short of expectations. This pattern is what has produced further disinflation since the economy emerged from the recession of the early 1980s.

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I-FOMC

Material r fo

FOMC  Monetary  Policy  riefing B

January  1,  1996 3

SHOCKS TO  THE EQUILIBRIUM REAL FUNDS RATE (FIFTY BASIS POINTS)

No  Policy  Response

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Alternative  onetary Responses M To a Permanent  50 Basis Point  Shock To the Equilibrium eal Interest  ate R R

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Exhibit 3

Monetary Policy nd the  Role of  Bond-Market Expectations: a Effect f  a Permanent o 50 Basis  Point  Rise In  the  Equilibrium  eal Interest  ate R R

<!-- missing-text -->

Exhibit 4

Some lessons

- 1. Monetary policy aces uncertainties: f
- *  About the level f  equilibrium  ates o r
- *  About the  transmission  mechanism of  policy
- 2. Slow reactions o  changed  circumstances risk olicy rrors hat t p e t can be difficult  costly o  reverse. and t
- 3. A bond  market that  correctly  nticipates  he  Committee's a t actions  can play  a helpful tabilizing  le, llowing  the s ro a Committee  to  move  cautiously or  a time. f
- 4. Greater  uncertainty  mplies he need  for  flexibility i t in policymaking.
- 5. An  opportunistic  trategy ntails  tronger  reactions o  possible s e s t increases  in nflation an to  possible  decreases. i th