APPENDIX

Mr. Chairman:

Since your last meeting, forward interest rates have shifted to imply somewhat greater expectations for a  firming in  Japanese and U.S. monetary policies in the coming months. Despite the Bundesbank's 50 basis point reduction in official rates in midApril, forward mark interest rates are now  back at  the same level they were eight weeks ago, continuing to  suggest the possibility of a  further reduction in  the repo rate.

All together, these forward rates reflect the perceived growth scenarios of  expanding Japanese and  U.S. economies and  of  little or no  growth in  Germany. While it is not always so tidy, the exchange markets have also reflected this outlook, with the mark weakening against both the yen  and  the dollar.

Looking forward to the rest of the year, the most obvious risk --in the sense of  what is not now  priced in --is the risk that the Japanese and U.S. economies might not be as strong as recent data have suggested and  that the German economy might be stronger. Were this to  occur, the mark would be likely to  strengthen sharply against the dollar, the yen  and  other European currencies.

At  present, however, the markets reflect a  decidedly negative sentiment toward Germany, especially compared to the  U.S.

Since the start of this year, the 2-year-to-10-year spread in German government bonds has increased from around 220 to 260 basis points, while the comparable 2-to-10 year spread here has increased from 40 to 60 basis points. At the same time, the differential between 10-year German and U.S. rates has shifted from 30 basis points in  favor of  Germany to 30 basis points in  favor of the U.S. Also since the start of  the year, the mark has declined 6  percent against the dollar.

Dollar-yen has oscillated over the period, following the shifts in  the market's perception of the imminence of  a  tightening in  policy by  the Bank of  Japan; but overall, dollar-yen is little changed from the time of  your last meeting.

Throughout April, near-term, forward, yen interest rates were consistently rising as the market responded to a  constant drumbeat of  warnings from Bank of  Japan officials that rates would be raised sooner rather than later. From early April to early May, dollaryen fell from 108 and a  half to 104 and a  half. More recently, dollar-yen bounced back to trade around 107 after the market received the very clear impression from BoJ officials that a  rate hike was not so imminent.

In the Treasury market, yields on  the 30-year bond backed up above 7 percent for a  few  days in  early May, following the release of first-quarter GDP  data and as the  market confronted new supply from the Treasury's auctions. The  market traded somewhat anxiously until the release of the PPI and CPI and until the new  supply was distributed. Although yields are below their recent peaks, the modest decline still encompasses the expectation that the Committee is likely to  raise rates by  the end of  this year.

Equity prices regained their footing, and continued marching higher, following the relatively benign inflation data and the modest decline in  bond yields.

In domestic operations, we faced fairly large needs to add reserves. Although demand for currency was less strong than anticipated, Treasury balances far exceeded expectations due to higher than forecast individual tax returns in  April.

The Desk continues to respond to the skew in demand for reserves toward the end of  each maintenance period. In  the first intra-meeting maintenance period demand for reserves seemed quite evenly distributed. Since then, however, demand for reserves has again been heavily skewed toward the last two days of each maintenance period.

Early in the intermeeting period the Desk purchased 3.5 billion dollars of Treasury securities for the Account in three separate operations over two  days.

Mr. Chairman, we had no foreign exchange intervention operations during the period. I will need the Committee's ratification of our domestic operations. I  would be happy to answer any  questions.

E.M.Truman May  21,  1996

FOMC Presentation International  velopments --De

I  thought t ight  be useful o  offer   few observations th  regard o  the  external  ector  f i m t a wi t s o the  U.S.  economy by way of  introduction    Mike Prell's  iefing  n the  economy  as  a whole. to br o

First,  he  Commerce  Department  released  n Friday  preliminary  ata  for  trade n  goods  and t o d i services  n  March.  These  data elped  to  fill  ut  the icture  or he  first arter  hat as  evolved  from i h o p f t qu t h releases  ince our  last  eeting.  They were broadly n  line  with  what  we  had assumed in  the s y m i Greenbook  forecast; e  downward  revision  n  the  deficit r  February oughly  offset   slightly th i fo r a higher-than-expected  ficit   March. de in

These  data  would cause  us  to  revise  p slightly r  estimate  f  real et  exports n u ou o n i Q1 by about $2-1/2  billion.  e  now  estimate  hat he  growth  of eal xports f  goods  and services  n  the  quarter W t t r e o i was about  5 percent t  an  annual  rate,  own slightly om the  6-1/2 ercent ecorded ver  the  four a d fr p r o quarters  f  1995,  but  still ster  han  growth  in  the  U.S.  economy  as  a whole. Real  imports  rose t o fa t a more than  a 10 percent nnual  rate uring he  quarter,  p sharply rom the  pace  of  last  ear.  In  our a d t u f y projections,   have anticipated at he  growth  of  real xports f oods and services  hould  pick  up we th t e o g s somewhat as  activity celerates road; owever,  we  are  now forecasting at mports  will xpand ac ab h th i e more rapidly  nd that n balance he  external  ector ill ubtract   couple  of enths rom growth  for a o t s w s a t f the  balance  of he  projection riod. t pe

Second,  with  respect  o  growth  abroad, n average ur  outlook s  essentially  changed  from t o o i un that resented  n  the  past everal  reenbooks. p i s G

Recent  developments  in  Japan  are  consistent th  growth  this ear f round  3  percent; wi y o a however,  we  expect he  expansion o  slow  next  year  with  the  negative nfluence  f  tighter scal t t i o a fi policy  and a  somewhat less ccommodative monetary  policy utweighing he  positive  timulus  o a o t s t Japanese et  exports rom the  weakened yen. n f

In  Europe,  we think here as a small  pickup  in  growth  on average n  the  first arter  n  part t w i qu i due to  a bounceback  in  economic activity   France  from  the  strike-depressed line  n  the  fourth in dec i quarter.  In  Germany, real DP  appears o  have  extended  its ecline lthough he  steepness  as G t d a t w magnified  by  the  effects  f he  harsh  winter n the  construction dustry. n  general,  e  continue  o o t o in I w t believe hat he  positive  nfluence  f  easier  onetary  policies d weaker  exchange  rates  ill utweigh t t i o m an w o the  effects  f  continuing  iscal  ontraction d produce  a modest  acceleration   real DP o f c an of G in  Europe in  the  second  half f  this ear.  Although  we do not  think hat udget eficits xt  year  in  either o y t b d ne Germany  or  France  will  meet  the  Maastricht  riteria  rictly  fined,  ur  expectation  s  that hose wo c st de o i t t countries  ill ead  small  band into ull uropean  Monetary Union on  January  1,  1999. w l a f E

In  North  America,  we  see  encouraging igns f  a rise n  economic activity   Canada in  recent s o i in employment trends nd  the  pickup  in  retail les. Moreover,  the  data n Mexican real DP a sa o G in  the first arter  f  this ear  that ere released  ast  riday uggested n  expansion t  a seasonally  djusted qu o y w l F s a a a quarterly  ate f  more than  percent.  The report  as somewhat better  han  we had expected  but  was r o 2 w t broadly  consistent th  recent  ata  on industrial  oduction,  nemployment,  retail les nd imports. wi d pr u sa a

These  data  lend upport o  our  forecast  f rowth  over  the  four uarters  f  1996 around  4-1/2 ercent. s t o g q o p

Third, ne  change in  our  forecast  nvolves  he  foreign xchange  value  of  the  dollar. n  terms o i t e I of  other -10 currencies, e  weighted-average  ollar  as  appreciated  almost  10 percent rom  its G th d h by f low a  year  ago. In  our  Greenbook forecasts,  never  projected  hat he  dollar  ould stay s  low as we t t w a it  was during ost of he  second  and  third  uarters  f  last  ear. However, since he  December m t q o y t Greenbook,  we have  moved  up  our  projection r  the  dollar  bout  5 percent. he dollar's fo a T appreciation   far his ear  can  be  interpreted  rgely  s  an  endogenous  response o  the  relative so t y la a t strengthening   the  outlook or  the  U.S.  economy  over  this  eriod. Along with  the  rise n  long-term of f p i interest tes,  he  dollar's  preciation ould  help  to  dampen the  pace  of  expansion f  U.S.  economic ra t ap sh o activity.  Compared with  the  December  Greenbook,  we  estimate  hat  he  effect  f  the  stronger  ollar t t o d

that e are  now  projecting  y itself  ll  hold  back  the  growth  of  real DP  by a  bit ore than  a w b wi G m quarter  f  a  percentage  oint his ear  and  a bit ess ext ear. o p t y l n y

One question s  hether, ontrary  o  our  projection,  e  dollar  ill ontinue o  appreciate. i w c t th w c t A factor  upporting  his iew in  the  near  term  is  he  observation  hat ince ecember the  rise  n  U.S. s t v t t s D i interest tes  n 10-year  government  bonds relative    foreign  ates n average as  been  about  90 ra o to r o h basis oints.  According  to  our  econometric quations  uch  a rise n  general  ould be  expected o p e s i w t produce  an  appreciation   the  dollar  omewhat larger  han  what has  actually  ccurred.  Cutting of s t o against  urther  ollar  ppreciation   the  fact hat  he  assumptions bout  U.S.  interest tes  nderlying f d a is t t a ra u the  Greenbook forecast, ntrary  o  market  expectations,  not  involve  increases  n  short-term  ates co t do i r later  his  ear.  In  addition, e  staff's  tlook or he  U.S.  external  ector s  ore pessimistic an t y th ou f t s i m th that ound  in  many  private  orecasts;  e  are  right,  he  realization   ur  forecast  ould  begin o f f ifw t ofo c t weigh on  the  dollar.

In  the  longer erm,  the  exchange  value f  the  dollar  s  ikely  o  be affected  y  the  transition t o i l t b to the  single  uropean  currency - he  euro  -- n  stage II f  EMU E -t i I o on January  1,  1999.  The dollar  ould c well  come under  upward pressure  ecause  euro-denominated  ssets  re  not  likely  o  be  perceived,  t b a a t a least  nitially,  particularly  tractive. number of  arguments  support his iew. i as at A t v

First  s he  inevitable ntroversies out  the  legal tatus  f  euro-denominated  ssets  nd the i t co ab s o a a conversion nto uros  of  assets  ow  denominated  in  Ecu or  national  urrencies. i e n c

Second,  according o  current  lans, he  euro  in  currency orm will  not  circulate  or  use  in t p t f f retail ansactions  til  002;  that s  three ears fter  he  constituent rrencies  re  locked ogether. tr un 2 i y a t cu a t In  the  interim, ssible  roblems  in  the  acceptance t  par  of  national  urrencies  y economic  agents  n po p a c b i the  different untries  ill end  to  undermine  confidence n  the  project  s  a  whole. However, it lso co w t i a a is  possible  hat he  private  ector  ill uccessfully  omote  currency ubstitutes,    the  introduction t t s w s pr s or of the  euro  currency ay  be accelerated. m

Third,  it  is enerally  xpected hat he  European  Central ank will onduct  open market g e t t B c operations  argely  n  the  form of  repo  transactions;   actual  ransactions  ll ot  be  centralized, l i the t wi n instead  hey  will e dispersed  o  the  various ational  enters. uch a modus operandi s  likely  o  hold t b t n c S i t back the  development  of  a liquid  holesale arket  in  euro  instruments. w m

Fourth, he  performance  of  the  central  ank  as  a replacement nflation  ghter  or he t b i fi f t Bundesbank will e questioned  ven  if he  new institution tially  inclined  o  be tighter an  the b e t i i is t th Bundesbank would have been  in  similar  ircumstances,   is  likely  o  be  the  case. c as t

My  impression  s  that hese actors  re  beginning o  become apparent  o  the  market  along  with i t f a t t an increase  n  speculation  bout  the  rates  t  which  the ational  urrencies  ill e locked  together  n i a a n c w b i the  euro. They may already e giving  a  boost  to  the  dollar  hrough  an  increase  n  the  risk remia  on b t i p the  assets  ssued y  the  governments  likely  o  be  part f he  move  to  full MU. i b t o t E

Mike Prell ill  complete  our  presentation. w

Michael J.  Prell May 21, 1996

FOMC BRIEFING

For some time now, we've been warning of inflationary risks in  the outlook. But one  needed to  apply a magnifying glass to the Greenbook numbers to discern signs of  those risks. With the latest forecast, though, that's no longer true: Even in  our  baseline forecast, which leaves out a  minimum wage hike and  assumes decent crops, we're calling for overall CPI inflation to  run  perceptibly above 3  percent this year and next. With  your indulgence, I'll take just a  few  minutes to review our argument.

First, there's no sign that economic growth is about to  slow to the point that resource utilization rates will fall significantly. Rather, our forecast is that unemployment and  plant use will remain roughly where they were last month. And, to  reach that conclusion, rather than that markets will tighten further, we've had  to  make several assumptions: (1)  That any boost to consumer demand from stock market gains will be  offset by such damping influences as debt burdens or  higher targets for retirement savings. (2)  That housing starts will drop off sharply in the next few months in response to the backup in  mortgage rates. (3) That high-tech investment won't keep the outlays for business equipment chugging along at anything remotely approaching the first-quarter rate. (4) That growth abroad will pick up  only moderately and that the appreciation of the dollar since last summer will help  produce a  small deterioration in  net exports. And (5), that businesses will keep a  tight rein on inventories, despite the vulnerabilities of just-in-time practices that have been apparent in recent months. We believe all those assumptions are appropriate,

FOMC Briefing - Michael Prell

May

21, 1996

Page 2

but they generally would seem to involve risks on  the upside at least as great as those on  the downside.

The second point in our argument is that current resource utilization levels carry with them the likelihood that inflation will tend to creep up, even without any assist from adverse exogenous shocks. I can't point to any smoking guns in  this regard. Indeed, the unemployment rate has averaged 5.6 percent since the fall of 1994, virtually the same as what we're forecasting, and  yet there are to date no  definitive signs of an  upturn in  compensation or  price increases. Clearly, the safer claim to  make at this juncture would be that nothing in the recent experience suggests that there's room for  a further decline in the unemployment rate without risking a  flare-up of inflation. But even that cautious observation has relevance for policy if  you think there's much chance that growth will significantly outstrip our expectations.

The third point in  our argument is that the best bet is that we won't enjoy a period free of  inflationary shocks. Let me  emphasize that we're dealing with a  lot of guesswork here, but we  have tried not to be  unduly pessimistic. In the case of energy prices, for example, we've aligned ourselves with the futures market, where the backwardation of  prices has been signaling relief from the recent pressures. Though the early May  Michigan survey suggested that the spike in  gasoline prices has had some effect on  consumer expectations, we expect that to reverse quickly, with little lingering effect on inflation. Yesterday's perverse market reaction aside, we view the earlier arrival of the Iraqi oil as reducing the risk that energy prices will prove a  persistent problem.

FOMC Briefing - Michael Prell

May  21,

1996

Page 3

We've also aligned ourselves in  broad terms with the futures market in anticipating that grain prices will ease with the fall harvest. Needless to say, the uncertainties are enormous in  this area, with so  much riding on  the whims of Mother Nature. However, given rising world food demand and  current low inventories, we think it will take healthy crops here and abroad over the next couple of years to avoid a deterioration in retail food price trends relative to what we've been enjoying for a while. Were there to be further crop failures like that which occurred with winter wheat, the implications for food  prices could be  quite adverse. As it is, we  believe the odds are high that food  prices will be  adding noticeably to CPI inflation over coming quarters directly and  also indirectly, through wage and expectational channels.

The run-up in  grain prices might be said to  be  partly a  selfinflicted wound, owing to  the decision to set aside land from planting last year, but there are  other inflationary shocks possibly in the offing that are more clearly deserving of that designation. We discussed the minimum wage hike in  the Greenbook and  we  mentioned in passing the legislative proposals for changes in  private medical insurance. Perhaps, in  this election year, one might be concerned that there could be still other political efforts to  address economic insecurities in  ways that don't directly affect the budget but that do add to production costs. There may  be some good news lurking out there as  well, but it  is certainly arguable that the balance of potential shocks today is tilted in the unhelpful direction in terms of the prospects for containing inflation without taking some demand pressures out of  the economy.

FOMC Briefing - Michael Prell May 21, 1996 Page 4

The final, and  clearly important, point in  our assessment of the outlook is our judgment that, absent a  tightening of policy, financial conditions aren't likely to  put much of a  crimp in demand growth over the next year and  a  half. Don  will be saying more on this later, so  I'll simply reiterate the  bottom-line judgment that we  noted in the Greenbook. That is, despite the backup in  bond yields, we don't see the prevailing financial environment as an  obstacle to continued solid growth.

FOMC Briefing Donald L. Kohn

Mike has detailed the reasons for the view in the staff forecast that the risks have shifted toward greater inflation. I'll discuss possible policy responses, in the context of  an assessment of current financial conditions. With regard to the latter, I've had distributed a set of  charts drawn from  the Financial Indicators package, but updated through yesterday and incorporating the new Philadelphia Fed inflation expectations survey.

The strength in aggregate demand in the first part of 1996 suggests that financial conditions in 1995 were not as restrictive as  had been thought, and may have been more accommodative than would be consistent with containing inflation. Conditions seem to have tightened in recent months, however; reacting primarily to the more robust economy, nominal long-term interest rates have risen to where they were in the spring of 1995, and the dollar has moved higher. Real interest rates, of  course, are difficult to measure, but undoubtedly they also have increased this year, though probably not as much as nominal rates. The question is whether real interest rates have settled at levels roughly consistent with at least forestalling any sustained pickup in inflation.

As you can see from chart 2, compared to the past 15 years, real long-term rates aren't unusually high. They have risen appreciably since 1993, when, under the impetus of a  highly stimulative monetary policy, they were at unsustainably low levels, but they are still in the lower portion of their range since 1979. Of course, that was a period of relatively high real rates and disinflation. To take account of  that, the next chart relates the level of the real long-term rate along the horizontal axis to the change in inflation one year later along the vertical. As you can see by the vertical dashed line, judging by the average experience in the period since the late 1970s, long-term rates now are in the neighborhood of  their natural level-that is, they are about in line with the levels that in the past have been consistent with no change in inflation.

That doesn't mean that there is no risk of rising inflation, however. For one, the relationship between real rates and economic activity obviously is loose, and some of the channels that might ordinarily be damping aggregate demand as interest rates rose have not been fully operational in 1996. In particular, the stock market, shown in the next chart, has continued to climb--boosting wealth and holding down the cost of capital. And credit supply conditions remain accommodative; yield spreads in securities markets are quite narrow, and banks have continued to ease the terms of  business lending while tightening standards

marginally for consumer loans. The dollar exchange rate, shown in the following chart, on the other hand, in both real and nominal terms, has risen substantially over the last year, which, as Ted noted, should hold down net exports.

In addition, the yield curve itself, the next chart, seems to embody some expectations of a rise in rates, albeit probably not a  very large one. As you can see, the curve is perhaps slightly steeper than normal, depending on the time period you look at. Similarly, readings from Eurodollar future markets suggest that the current level of long-term rates has some upward movement in short-term rates built into it. To be sure, the market does not expect the Committee to raise rates immediately, and neither the yield curve nor the staff forecast would seem to indicate that a major rate adjustment of say, more than a  percentage point, is likely to be needed to contain inflation, absent a  minimum  wage hike. Nonetheless, they do suggest that sustainable economic growth is more likely to be associated with a tightening than an  easing in policy at some point, even more so if the Committee's longer-term objective is to reduce, rather than simply contain, inflation.

If the Committee shared this assessment, there are a  number of reasons why it might want to tighten sooner rather than later. One would be concern about a  pickup in expected inflation. In financial markets, reactions to

movements in food and energy prices and to broad inflation data suggest that inflation prospects are getting attention, and some of the market response to strength in economic activity probably represents a  recognition that such a development raises inflation risks. On "Main Street", the Michigan survey does show an uptick in inflation expectations, both nearand longer-term. And somewhere in between Main Street and Wall Street, the professional economists surveyed by the Philadelphia Federal Reserve have revised up their expectations for inflation over the near term, though not by much and not for the long run, where they remain at 3 percent.

If it were to persist, a  rise in expected inflation would have several consequences. First, it effectively eases the stance of  monetary policy by reducing real shortterm rates. Second, an increase in inflation expectations tends to get built into inflation itself in part as businesses and workers attempt to protect themselves against declines in real earnings. These were the points made in the bluebook in the discussion of policy responses to supply shocks. Shocks that are not quickly reversed can become embedded in inflation expectations and, hence, in the inflation rate on a  persistent basis, requiring strong policy action to return to baseline inflation.

Allowing real rates to erode through policy inaction is not necessarily undesirable; it would have to be

considered in the context of all information bearing on financial conditions and the state of aggregate demand. But it might seem especially risky now  when aggregate demand already has been stronger than expected, and the economy is operating at or beyond estimates of its potential. Altogether, developments on both the supply and demand sides of the economy might be seen as arguing that the risks of greater inflation in the future had risen, and that consequently the stance for monetary policy ought to be tightened at this time or in the near future--especially if the Committee wanted to be reasonably sure that inflation would be capped near 3  percent in the current expansion, and to raise the odds on inflation moving lower over time.

A  turnaround in policy, from easing at the end of January to tightening in May  or shortly thereafter, would be fairly quick, but certainly not without precedent in  historical episodes. To be sure, markets would be surprised and rates would back up across the yield curve. But a  sharp response at the long end similar to that in the early months of 1994 seems unlikely. Markets could well see such an action as a  small adjustment in a  fundamentally sound overall situation--analogous in intent to recent easings--rather than the precursor of  an extended period of  tightening. In this case, the sell-off in the stock market might be  more limited.

But there is a  case for waiting as well. Although risks and expectations have shifted in the last several months, the odds on greater inflation may not be so high as to dictate an immediate tightening of policy. In effect the Committee may not share the staff's assessment or feel that little would be lost by looking for confirmation of  a deteriorating price picture, especially when a  significant portion of the run-up in inflation is a  function of supply shocks, which could reverse. Inflation expectations could well moderate as fuel and food prices stabilize and retrace some of their run-up. Readings on core inflation remain favorable, and this development along with the drop in oil prices seem already to have calmed inflation concerns in credit markets and damped expectations of a  near-term policy tightening. The early signs of pressures on resources that were so evident in late 1994 and early 1995, such as increases in industrial commodity and intermediate materials prices, deteriorating vendor performance, and rising overtime, are not yet evident. Finally, broad money growth has slowed substantially in April and May and viewed from the end of last year now seems on a  track more consistent with moderate expansion in nominal spending.

In these circumstances, the Committee may feel that waiting for more concrete indications that inflation pressures were emerging would not compromise its inflation objectives, recognizing that in adopting such a  strategy it

risks having ultimately to raise nominal rates by  more than if it had moved in advance. Moreover, even if inflation turns out to be  higher than foreseen, the intermediate-term deterioration is not apt to be very substantial unless output is much stronger than expected or all the adverse supply shocks come to pass. In a  situation in which large funds rate adjustments may not be called for, the recent backup in bond rates and rise in the dollar will help restrain demand for a  while. At some point, though, if inflation pressures really were intensifying, the Committee would need, at a  minimum, to validate the expected rise in the funds rate that seems to be built into the current configuration of  asset prices.

As a  final point, I've referred several times to your policy choices in the context of the Committee's longrun objectives. The Committee broached this subject in February, and the July meeting will, once again, provide a natural occasion to talk about those objectives and their implications. You  won't have a  Mack bill, or probably even hearings on this bill, to help frame your discussion. One possible alternative method you could consider is submitting your expectations of inflation and output not only for 1996 and 1997, as you ordinarily would at this time, but for 1998 as well. I  would expect that what you sent in for 1998 would be interpreted as goals--that is what you would be aiming for based on your own view of optimal policy--not

just your prediction based on what you think your colleagues on the FOMC might do. Such goals need not be for publication (at least before five years have elapsed), but rather could serve as a  way to surface the types of issues that might arise if  you wanted, or were required, to enunciate longer-term targets. Among other benefits, such an exercise might be  helpful to the Chairman if  he is called to testify on the Mack bill--especially if it illuminates the problems that could be associated with giving a  timetable for reaching price stability, as the bill calls for. Mr. Chairman, it would be useful to have the Committee's views on this suggestion at this time, so that we could include it, or whatever variant the Committee desired, in our requests for forecasts before the July meeting.

One-Year  Real Interest  ates R

<!-- missing-text -->

12

<!-- missing-text -->

- * SA/NBER A quarterly  survey until 990  01;  Philadelphia Federal  Reserve  Bank  survey thereafter.  Monthly 1 T-bill rates  less  most  recent quarterly  inflation  xpectation. e
- " CPI  defined to  exclude food and  energy.
- +  Denotes  May  20,1996 T-bill less most  recent inflation expectation.
- Note:  T-Bill is n a  coupon-equivalent  basis. o

<!-- missing-text -->

Long-Term  Real Interest  ates* R

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

1978  1979  1980  1981

1982  1983

1984

1985  1986  1987  1988  1989  1990  1991

1992  1993

1994

1995  1996

- * For real ates, he  solid ine easures  10-year  inflation  pectations r t l m ex by the  Blue Chip survey  until  pril A 1991 and the  Philadelphia  ederal F Reserve Bank  survey  thereafter.  otted  line ses Michigan D u 5 to 10 year  inflation  pectation. ex
- * Denotes May  20. 1996 value.

3

Chart

<!-- missing-text -->

- *Long-run inflation  pectations rom the ex f Hoey and Philadelphia  ed surveys,  held  constant  at F 3 percent  after  ay M 1996

Reflects  May  Greenbook  forecast

Chart 4

<!-- missing-text -->

(Monthly)

<!-- missing-text -->

The  Exchange  Value of  The  Dollar (Monthly G-10 Index)

<!-- missing-text -->

+  Denotes

May  20,1996 value.

Index Level (Detlated)

<!-- missing-text -->

3-month 3-month

Quarterly  Data

30-year 30-year

<!-- missing-text -->