Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Part 2

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Recent  Developments

January  29,  1997

Confidential  FR) Class ( III FOMC

January  29,  1997

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Final demand revived once again as 1996 drew to a  close, driving brisk growth in  production, employment, and income. Although tight labor markets and an  increase in the minimum wage sustained the uptrend in compensation increases, neither this additional cost nor that associated with higher energy prices left any discernible imprint last year on core inflation at the producer or  consumer levels. Indeed, with only a modest further increment last month, the core CPI rose just 2.6 percent in 1996.

Labor Market Developments

The labor market ended 1996 on a high note, with all major indicators pointing to robust growth of labor demand. In  December, nonfarm payrolls grew 262,000--bringing the average monthly gain for the quarter to 217,000--while aggregate production worker hours rose 0.9 percent for the month and 3.3 percent at an  annual rate for the fourth quarter as a whole. The strength in  the payroll survey was echoed by  the household survey. Household employment increased at an  average pace of 202,000 per month last quarter. Nonetheless, the unemployment rate held steady at 5.3 percent, as strong demand pulled more people into the labor market.

Hiring strength was widespread through year-end. Private payrolls posted monthly gains averaging 218,000 in  the fourth quarter, led by  continued advances in  the services and trade industries. Construction employment rose 23,000 in December for the second straight month, reflecting, in  part, unusually mild weather in some parts of  the country during the survey period. Factories added 19,000 jobs in December and 32,000 for the quarter--the biggest increase since early 1995; aircraft and parts producers accounted for more than half of these gains.

Other indicators also point to strong labor demand. Although initial claims for unemployment insurance have fluctuated fairly widely of  late, the recent range of readings appears consistent with solid employment growth. In addition, the proportion of respondents to  the Conference Board's survey who indicated that jobs are plentiful rose in December and January, while those indicating that jobs are hard to get fell; similarly, the net percentage expecting higher unemployment in  the  Michigan Survey edged up  only slightly in early January from its recent very low level.

(Thousands of employees; based on seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Average  change  from  final  onth m of preceding  period  to final  onth  of m period  indicated.
- 2.  Survey of establishments.
- 3.  Survey of households.

SELECTED UNEMPLOYMENT AND  LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION RATES (Percent; based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

Labor Market Indicators

Some Jobs Difficult   Fill to

<!-- missing-text -->

Help Wanted Advertising

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Job Availability

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Percentage expecting

'more'

minus percentage expecting

"less"

plus

100,

Unemployment Rates:  Actual vs.  Okun's  Law  Simulations

Simulation  Begins in 1990:Q3

<!-- missing-text -->

Note:  The Okun's Law  projection  or 996:Q4 is  ased on the  staffs f 1 b GDP projection.

<!-- missing-text -->

Over 1996 as a whole, nonfarm payrolls increased 2.56 million, while the household survey measure of  employment--adjusted to make it  better match the payroll concept--increased 2.71 million. 1 Yet, despite the rapid pace of  employment growth over the year, the unemployment rate fell just 0.3 percentage point--from 5.6 percent in  the fourth quarter of 1995 to 5.3 percent in  the fourth quarter of 1996. This relatively small decline would seem at  variance with Okun's Law, and reflects a  run-up in the labor force participation rate--from 66.5 percent in  the fourth quarter of 1995 to 66.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 1996. Last year's discrepancy is not unusual, however, as Okun's law often noticeably overor underpredicts changes in  the unemployment rate over periods as short as a year or  two. Okun's law  better explains unemployment rate fluctuations over longer periods. In  the current cycle, for example, Okun's law  predicted most of  the rise in  the unemployment rate over 1991 and 1992 and the subsequent decline to its current level.

One negative feature of last year's labor market was  the continued slow growth of  nonfarm business sector productivity--about 3/4 percent for the year, by  our estimate. This actually would be an  improvement over the performance in 1994 and 1995, but it calls into further question our long-standing assumption that the underlying, cyclically adjusted trend rate of productivity growth this decade has been 1.1 percent per year. Output per hour, according to the  published data, has now  grown, on average, only 0.8 percent per year since the middle of 1990.

At  the same time, however, we  would also note that productivity measurement is sensitive to  the choice of  output measure. In particular, using the income-side measure of  nonfarm business output, one finds healthier productivity growth, averaging more than 1-1/2 percent in 1996 and 1.1 percent per year since the last business cycle peak. But  there appears to  be  no  tendency in  the annual or  benchmark NIPA revisions for the statistical discrepancy to be revised toward zero. And the reason the BEA advertises Gross Domestic Product as its official measure of  domestic output is that they consider the preliminary spending indicators used to construct

GROWTH IN SELECTED COMPONENTS OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION (Percent change from  preceding comparable period)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

this product-side measure to be  more reliable than the preliminary income-side indicators used to  construct Gross Domestic Income. Still, there are reasons to suspect that the official output and productivity estimates for the nonfarm business sector are understating gains. As  has been noted, for example, the nonfinancial corporate sector--which excludes many of the industries producing difficult-to-measure output and is  measured on  the income side--has shown consistently stronger productivity growth than the nonfarm business sector.

Industrial Production 2

Industrial production increased 0.7 percent in  December after a 0.8 percent gain in  November. Increases were widespread across manufacturing industries; elsewhere, a  steep decline in  utilities output, reflecting unseasonably mild weather in  December, was partly offset by an  upturn in  mining. The surge in  activity brought IP growth in the fourth quarter to 3.8 percent at  an  annual rate, 1/2 percentage point above its third-quarter rate. The December surge in  manufacturing output boosted the factory operating rate to 82.6 percent, the highest level since September 1995.

The output of  motor vehicles and parts was little changed in December, although the composition of production shifted a  bit toward trucks. Looking ahead, schedules call for increases in assemblies of  both cars and trucks in January, reflecting, in part, a  further easing of  the lingering production disruptions at GM.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Components may not sum to  totals because of  rounding.

The production of aircraft and parts moved up 1.8 percent in December, continuing the strong upturn that began a  year ago. Reports indicate that the industry has scheduled a  steady rate of

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may  not  add  to  totals because of  rounding. Data on  sales of  trucks and  imported autos for the  most recent month are  preliminary and subject to  revision.

- 1.  Excludes the estimated effect of  automakers' changes in reporting periods.
- 2.  Excludes some vehicles produced in  Canada that are classified as imports by  the industry.

Marketing  Incentives  or ight f L Vehicles (FRB  seasonals)

Buyer Sentiment  for ew  Vehicles N

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Data from J.D.  Powers.

increase until the end of 1997.3 Outside of  motor vehicles and aircraft, manufacturing output increased 1.0 percent in  December, with substantial advances in every major category.

The annual revision of  IP, capacity, and capacity utilization released on  January 27 incorporated updated source data and featured a  change in  the method of  aggregating the indexes. From 1977 onward, the value-added proportions used to  weight individual series were updated annually rather than every five years, and were aggregated using a  Fisher formula rather than a  linked-Laspeyres. The  new  aggregation methods lowered IP and capacity growth, reflecting in large part the smaller weights applied to  the fastgrowing computer industry. The new estimates of production and capacity from 1992 onward also incorporate additional and updated statistics. Overall, these revisions lowered the average annual rate of growth of IP over the past three years by  about 1/2 percentage point.

The revision had only a  minor influence on capacity utilization rates. The lower estimate of IP growth was, in general, accompanied by  a  downward revision in  capacity growth (also reflecting the changed method of  aggregation). The most recent peak in factory utilization (84.6 percent) still occurs at  the end of 1994; the average rate of capacity utilization in  manufacturing from 1963 to 1996, 81.9 percent, is just a  tad below the previous estimate of 82.1 percent, and, as  before, the December rate (82.6 percent) is just a bit above this longer-run average.

Motor Vehicles

Reported sales of light motor vehicles in December were 14.8 million units at an  annual rate, based on recently revised FRB seasonal factors, the same as the October-November average; actual sales were about 300,000 units below this pace because some automakers included an  extra selling day in their December report.4 Based on  confidential data from company sources, sales in  December were propped up  by  a  bounceback in  GM  fleet sales, which had  been unusually low  in October and November owing to  the

Medium and Heavy Truck Sales

(FRB  seasonals;  annual  rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note:  Data from Americas Commercial Transportation Research  Qo.

strike-related supply disruptions at GM  and subsequent model changeover problems. For the fourth quarter as a whole, total light vehicle sales declined a bit as the dip in  fleet sales overshadowed a moderate rise in  retail sales.

In the near term, a host of  factors should encourage retail sales. Chief among these factors is  favorable pricing. New car prices in the CPI fell 1.7 percent at an annual rate in  the last three months of 1996, as Big Three sales incentives moved up in  the fourth quarter; first-quarter plans call for further increases in incentives to above the high levels of  a  year ago. In  addition, new car-buying attitudes zoomed in  the preliminary Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment for January. Respondents cited low prices and the strong economy as reasons why it  was a  good time to  buy a  car.

Sales of  medium and heavy trucks were essentially unchanged in December after having fallen 26,000 units at  an annual rate in November. Sales have been trending down for about a year, but demand may  have improved some recently. Orders for heavy trucks (class 8)  have increased a  bit, and backlogs have ticked up in the past few  months after dropping steadily since early 1995. Orders have also improved for medium trucks (class 5-7), where backlogs had plummeted to very low  levels. Over the past year, medium and heavy truck production mirrored sales, keeping inventories in  line and leaving the days' supply at  about its average level over the past four years.

Personal Income and Consumption

Household spending appears to  have rebounded from its slump of last summer, with growth in  real PCE probably picking up to about a 3 percent pace in  the fourth quarter of 1996. Moreover, the continued solid uptrend in income and the very favorable recent readings of  sentiment suggest plenty of room for spending to expand in  the months ahead.

According to the advance report, total nominal retail sales increased 0.6 percent in  December and 1.2 percent (not at  an annual rate) for the quarter as a whole. Spending in the retail control category, which excludes sales at automotive dealers and building material and supply stores, rose 0.7 percent last month and 1.3 percent (not  at  an  annual rate) in  the fourth quarter. In December, outlays at  most types of stores within the retail control category posted moderate or large gains. The only area of  weakness in  December was furniture and appliance stores, where nominal sales

<!-- missing-text -->

1. Total retail sales less building material and  supply stores and automotive dealers, except auto and  home supply stores.

PCE Goods

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. October,  November, and December values  are staff  stimates. e

barely increased after declining in the two previous months. Although nominal spending in  this category has been held down to some extent by  falling prices of  electronic goods, the trend in real purchases also seems to  have weakened somewhat from the very strong pace of recent years. This pattern is consistent with anecdotal reports indicating that holiday spending on  computers was weaker this year than last. 5

The most recent data on services expenditures point to a moderate advance in  November following a  similar gain in October. Energy spending jumped in  November, reflecting lower-than-normal temperatures. Energy expenditures likely fell back considerably in December, however, owing to the mild weather. This pattern should reverse in  January, as  the weather has been slightly cooler than normal thus far. Among non-energy services, spending in  most major categories posted moderate increases in  November.

Despite the gains in spending last quarter, the saving rate likely held close to its third-quarter level of 5-1/4 percent, as personal income also posted a healthy increase. In  November, real disposable income rose 0.3 percent, with more than two-thirds of  the gain attributable to an increase in  wages and salaries. Among components of nonwage income, farm proprietors' income fell, but other categories advanced moderately. In  December, the large increases in  aggregate hours and  hourly earnings likely boosted labor income sharply further.

Although there are no reliable spending data yet available for January, readings of  consumer sentiment have continued to  be quite upbeat. According to the preliminary report, the Michigan SRC  index of consumer sentiment edged down in early January but remained at the upper end of  the favorable range that has prevailed since early 1994. In  addition, the January Conference Board report showed confidence rising to  the highest level since the late 1980s.

One negative in  the consumer spending outlook is  the possibility that debt burdens are constraining some households. The recently released 1995 Survey of  Consumer Finances provides some interesting evidence on changes in  debt by  income group earlier in the decade. For almost all income groups, both the share of

Personal  Saving  Rate

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

households with debt and the mean amount borrowed (in real terms) rose between 1992 and 1995. However, changes in financial conditions were not uniform across income groups: Median ratios of payments to income rose considerably for households with incomes below $25,000. 6 while holding steady or  declining for households in  higher income brackets. Whether low-income households took on a greater debt burden because they perceived brighter future income prospects or  because of aggressive marketing by  lenders, their subsequent spending may  have been pinched by  the combination of the high payment burden and the inability or  unwillingness to  take on more credit; alternatively, however, greater access to credit may simply have allowed them to accelerate purchases they would have made later, thereby damping subsequent demands. Moreover, households in  this group probably gained little from the run-up in stock prices during the past two years, because they typically hold very small amounts of  equities. Thus, the experience of low-income households--which, according to  the BLS's Consumer Expenditure Survey, account for a  bit more than 20 percent of  total spending--may be  one factor that has held the aggregate saving rate up  despite the increase in stock market wealth.

<!-- missing-text -->

Source. Survey of Consumer Finances, 1992 and 1995.

Housing Markets

There clearly was a  slowdown in  single-family housing activity in  the final quarter, but the monthly noise in  starts made it difficult to  discern the degree of  weakening. Starts dropped 12 percent in  December, more than offsetting the November increase.

Private  Housing  Activity

(Millions  f  units;  easonally  adjusted  annual rate) o s

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. p Preliminary. r Revised. n.a.  Not  available.

Private  Housing  Starts

(Seasonally  adjusted  annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

However, unusually heavy precipitation late in  the month, particularly in the West, likely contributed to  the falloff in housing starts. 7 Single-family permit issuance, which is more reliable statistically and less affected by  weather, was little changed last month. For the fourth quarter as a  whole, starts and permits were well aligned, and both  were down appreciably from their third-quarter levels.

Home sales have also slowed from the rapid third-quarter pace. Although sales of  new  homes ticked up  in November, the average sales pace in  October and November was down nearly 9  percent from the average for the third quarter. In  addition, the history of  large revisions to  preliminary estimates of  new  home sales leaves open the possibility that the November reading overstated the strength of housing demand; the initial estimates for the two preceding months were subsequently revised down about 35,000 units. Existing home sales declined 3.8 percent in the  fourth quarter to a  3.95 million unit annual rate.

More recent indicators are somewhat ambiguous about the strength of demand for single-family homes. An  industry survey showed that builders' assessments of  new  home sales weakened in early January; however, respondents who rated current sales as good still outnumber those who rate sales as poor. On  the positive side, home buying attitudes, as measured by  the preliminary January Michigan survey, jumped to  their most optimistic level in  nearly three years. Finally, as in some earlier year-end periods, applications for mortgages to purchase homes have been  volatile in recent weeks, likely reflecting the difficulty of  seasonally adjusting a  rather short time series of  weekly data to reflect the Christmas and New  Year's holidays. Over the latter part of 1996, however, applications have shown no obvious trend.

Multifamily housing starts fell to 305,000 units in  December, a touch above the October level. Nevertheless, multifamily starts increased nearly 13 percent in  1996 to the highest level for any year since 1989. The vacancy rate for multifamily rental units declined a  bit in the fourth quarter but remains elevated relative to the rate before the building boom in the  mid-1980s.

Indicators  of  Housing  Demand

(Seasonally adjusted; FRB  seasonals)

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer Homebuying Attitudes

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Multifamily  Rental Vacancy Rate

<!-- missing-text -->

Business Fixed Investment

Growth in  real business fixed investment slowed considerably in the fourth quarter from the 17-1/2 percent increase posted in the third. Although nominal construction expenditures on  nonresidential structures reportedly skyrocketed during October and  November, nominal purchases of  producers' durable equipment appear to  have been flat in  recent months. Favorable financial market conditions, good cash flow, and technological change--leading to rapid obsolescence and falling prices--probably still are providing some impetus to outlays. However, the level of  investment last year was already high enough to result in an  increase in the stock of producers' durable equipment of  nearly 6 percent--a rapid pace by historical standards.

Shipments of nondefense capital goods, excluding computers and aircraft, increased 0.6 percent in  December and only 0.7 percent during the fourth quarter as a whole. Despite a  strong December, nominal computer shipments--which increased 4.4 percent in  the third quarter--fell 0.6 percent during the fourth quarter. The big swing in computer shipments may  be due, in part, to  a  shift in  seasonal patterns. There are reports that many computer manufacturers, hoping to avoid the bottlenecks that have emerged near year-end over the past few  years, attempted to pull fourth-quarter demand into the third quarter with aggressive pricing schemes last year. Shipments of communications equipment edged down slightly in  December from their robust pace in  November. Shipments of such equipment were up 5  percent for the fourth quarter and 16 percent for the year as a whole, driven by  healthy growth in  the demand for cellular phone services. Shipments of  nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft, office and computing, and communications equipment were little changed during the fourth quarter. Looking ahead, recent large increases in  orders for communications equipment--which, though falling sharply in  December, still posted a healthy gain for the fourth quarter--point to continued growth in  spending. The stagnation of  new orders outside of  the high-tech area suggests a softening of  demand for these goods.

Business purchases of  transportation equipment were weak in  the fourth quarter. As  had been expected, purchases of  motor vehicles declined markedly, as production shortfalls from  the GM  strikes prompted cuts in fleet sales in October and November, and sales of heavy trucks fell. Aircraft outlays are  also likely to  be a  drag on

BUSINESS CAPITAL SPENDING INDICATORS (Percent change from preceding comparable period; based on  seasonally adjusted data, in current dollars)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Percent change of  number of rigs in  use, seasonally adjusted.
- 3. Based on  1992 chain-weighted data; percent change, annual rate.

n.a.

Not  available.

Nonresidential Construction and  Contracts

(Six-month  moving average)

<!-- missing-text -->

Nonresidential Construction Indicators

CB Commercial  Vacancy  Rates

<!-- missing-text -->

National  Real Estate  Price  Index  *

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Data are semiannual from 1986 to 1991, and quarterly  rom f 1992 to  present.

FDIC Survey

<!-- missing-text -->

fourth-quarter PDE: Although shipments of aircraft likely moved up in  the fourth quarter, an unusually large fraction of shipments reportedly went to  foreign carriers.8 However, the outlook for domestic deliveries over the next few  years continues to  be strong, as Boeing has built up  an  impressive backlog of  orders from U.S. carriers.

Outlays for nonresidential structures surged in  the first two months of the fourth quarter. Construction put-in-place advanced 2.3 percent during November after increasing 4.3 percent in  October. The strong growth was most pronounced in office and institutional construction. Smoothing through the monthly gyrations, contracts for construction also appear to  be on  a  solid uptrend.

Because the data on  construction expenditures and contracts are highly variable and large gains may be  revised substantially downward, one should be  cautious in  interpreting sharp movements such as these. However, other indicators of  demand have been quite positive for some time, giving credence to  the view that the rapid growth in outlays for nonresidential structures in the fourth quarter may be  part of  a  solid uptrend in  building. For example, vacancy rates for office buildings in suburban markets have continued to decline. In  addition, the National Real Estate Index indicates that transaction prices for  both office buildings and warehouses have been rising at  around a  4  percent annual rate since early 1994, and the FDIC real estate survey of senior examiners and asset managers reports a  very strong assessment of  the strength of the commercial market.

Business Inventories

Business inventory investment picked up somewhat early in  the fourth quarter. For all manufacturing and trade excluding motor vehicles, inventories, on  a  book-value basis, expanded at  an  annual rate of $39 billion in  October and November, up from a  $22 billion pace during the third quarter. On  balance, the increased rate of stock accumulation was accompanied by  relatively firm shipments and sales, and inventory-sales ratios for most industries and trade groupings edged lower from their third-quarter levels.

Much of  the recent pickup in inventory investment occurred in the  manufacturing sector. In  book-value terms, factory stocks rose at  an  annual rate of  $17.2 billion in  October and $20.1 billion in

CHANGES IN  MANUFACTURING AND TRADE

INVENTORIES (Billions of  dollars at annual rates:

based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

SELECTED INVENTORY-SALES RATIOS

(Months' supply, based on  Census book-value data, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

November--nearly double the third-quarter pace. A  substantial part of  the buildup was in stocks of aircraft and parts, which have been trending up over the past year, likely reflecting increases in  both work-in-process and materials in  anticipation of  the further growth in production needed to satisfy the increasing backlog in  orders. Changes elsewhere generally were small.

<!-- missing-text -->

Trade inventories expanded moderately, on  net, in  October and November. Wholesale inventories, excluding motor vehicles, were up at  an annual rate of  only $1.7 billion in  November after an accumulation of $6.8 billion in  October. The relatively modest increases, in  book-value terms, were, in part, the result of sharp declines in producers' food prices at  the crude and intermediate stages of processing; wholesale inventories may have expanded somewhat more rapidly in real terms. In any event, given that wholesale inventories were drawn down during the third quarter, even the modest accumulation in  October and  November would contribute positively to the overall rate of  economic growth in  the fourth quarter. In retail trade, the average rate of  buildup in  non-auto inventories in October and November was about the same as in  the third quarter.

On  the whole, the moderate buildup in  trade inventories in October and  November was about in  line with the growth in sales. As a  result, neither the retail nor the wholesale trade sector appeared

Inventory-Sales Ratios,  by Major Sector

(Book value)

Manufacturing

<!-- missing-text -->

Wholesale  Excluding  Motor Vehicles

<!-- missing-text -->

Retail

<!-- missing-text -->

to  have any serious inventory imbalances as of  the end of November. 9

Federal Sector

For the first fiscal quarter of 1997, the federal government recorded a  $59 billion unified budget deficit. Excluding spectrum auction proceeds and deposit insurance, and adjusting outlays for payment timing shifts, the deficit for October through December was $3  billion above a  year earlier.10 Receipts were $22 billion above the first fiscal quarter last year, while adjusted outlays were $25 billion higher than a year ago.

Compared with the same period last year, receipts from individual income taxes were up 11 percent and those from social insurance taxes were 8  percent higher. December contained the last of the four estimated quarterly corporate tax payments on 1996 tax year liabilities. Net corporate receipts in  December were only $1 billion (2 percent) above a  year ago. However, for the year as a whole, quarterly declarations on  1996 corporate liabilities were about $10 billion above those in 1995, which is roughly consistent with profits growth.

Contributing to the spurt in  outlays was increased spending for Medicare, which was almost 12 percent above a  year earlier. Medicaid expenditures were up more than 7  percent compared with last year, considerably above the restrained 3  percent increase seen in fiscal year 1996. Spending for defense rose 5  percent, while outlays for nondefense items other than social insurance programs (social security, health, income security) and net interest surged 15 percent. In the first fiscal quarter last year, these defense and nondefense outlays were held down significantly by  a  restrictive continuing resolution that funded programs covered by  unpassed appropriations bills.

The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) released The Economic and Budget Outlook: Fiscal Years 1998-2007 on  January 28. In  the absence of legislative changes, CBO projects the fiscal 1997 unified federal budget deficit to  be $124 billion, a  $17 billion increase

Outlays

Deposit

Spectrum

Other

Receipts

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS (Unified basis; billions of  dollars except as noted)

Fiscal year

December

1995

1996

133.1

-.

8

.0

133.8

138.3

129.1

-. 7

-3.6

133.5

148.5

1996

379.9

-2.7

.0

382.6

324.1

1997

404.8

-6.4

-3.6

414.8

346.0

totals

Dollar change

24.9

-3.7

-3.6

32.2

21.9

Percent change

6.6

136.1

N.A.

8.4

6.8

Deficit

(+)

-5.3

-19.4

55.7

58.8

3.0

5.4

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may  not sum  to  totals because of  rounding.

- 1.  A shift in  payment timing occurs when the  first of  the month falls on  a weekend or  holiday. The  monthly and  fiscal year  to  date outlays for  defense, Medicare, income security, and "other" have been  adjusted to  account for  this shift.

insurance auction

(DI)

(SA)

relative to fiscal 1996. The deficit, assuming current policy, is projected to dip slightly to $120 billion in  fiscal 1998 but to rise to $188 billion by  fiscal 2002. It would rise steadily thereafter, reaching $278 billion in  fiscal 2007.

Although the deficit is projected to  be $188 billion in  fiscal 2002, CBO estimates that legislative changes need to  produce only $154 billion in  savings (including associated debt service savings) to  balance the budget by  that year. This is because CBO is projecting a  $34 billion "fiscal dividend" for that year if  a balanced budget policy were adopted. The fiscal dividend is CBO's estimate of  the budget consequences--reflecting lower interest rates and slightly higher output growth--that would stem from achieving a balanced budget in  fiscal 2002 and maintaining that balance in subsequent years. CBO projects that maintaining budget balance after fiscal 2002 would require further legislated budget savings in subsequent years.

CBO's projections of  the deficit, assuming current policy, are significantly below its last long-run projections published in  May 1996. In the  near term, the deficit for fiscal 1997 is projected to be $47 billion below CBO's estimate last May, and its deficit estimate for fiscal 1998 is $74 billion lower. A  significant technical factor contributing to CBO's improved deficit outlook is its substantially lower projected growth rates for Medicaid and Medicare spending. The enactment of farm and welfare reform legislation in 1996 are additional sources of lower expected future spending.

Higher projected receipts also account for a  substantial part of  the reduction in CBO's deficit outlook. Their new  economic projections show corporate profits and wages and salaries representing a  larger share of  nominal GDP, thereby pushing the tax base higher and boosting revenues. Relative to last May, CBO's expected real GDP growth for calendar 1997 is somewhat higher, its inflation is slightly lower, and unemployment is lower; however, these factors contribute only marginally to CBO's lower deficit projections. Their longer-term projections for real growth, inflation, and unemployment are little changed from last May.

State and Local Governments

State and local spending appears to have increased appreciably in  the fourth quarter. Most of  the strength was due to  a  large jump in real construction outlays in  November, to a  level more than

CBO BUDGET AND ECONOMIC PROJECTIONS

<!-- missing-text -->

Source. Congressional Budget Office, The  Economic and Budget Outlook._ iscal Years .998-2D007 January 28, 1997.

6 percent above the third-quarter average. 1 1 The largest gains were in spending on  educational and other buildings. Meanwhile, the rise in  employment in  December was not enough to offset the  three preceding months of declines, and the level of state and local employment in  the fourth quarter stood a  bit below the third-quarter average.

A  December survey of  the states by  the National Conference of State Legislatures suggests that the fiscal position of  most states continues to  be  good. Most states expect revenue collections to  be on or above target through the remainder of  fiscal 1997, which ends on June 30; only Hawaii and Idaho expect a  decline. The key fiscal issues facing the legislatures in  the sessions just getting under way  are implementing welfare reform, funding primary and secondary education and corrections, enacting tax cuts, and addressing Medicaid requirements.

Labor Costs and Prices

The latest data on  wages and compensation give evidence of  the pressures in  the labor market. According to  the employment cost index (ECI), hourly compensation of private industry workers rose 3.1 percent over the course of 1996, up from a  2.6 percent gain over 1995. 1 2 Hourly costs for  wages and salaries accelerated more than overall compensation, from 2.8 percent over 1995 to 3.4 percent over 1996. Wages picked up relatively sharply in retail trade, the industry with the largest concentration of  minimum-wage workers. Our estimate is that the hike in  the minimum wage added one-tenth of a  percentage point to  the overall ECI compensation increase last year.

The ECI for benefits was up 2  percent over 1996, versus 2.2 percent in 1995 and 3.7 percent in 1994. Much of the slowing in benefits cost growth in  recent years has been due to  health insurance costs--which decelerated from about 4  percent in 1994 to about 1/2 percent in  1996. However, profit margins, at  least of HMOs, are said to  be squeezed, and there are some reports that health insurance costs may  begin to turn less favorable.

EMPLOYMENT COST INDEX OF  HOURLY COMPENSATION FOR  PRIVATE INDUSTRY WORKERS

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Seasonally adjusted by the BLS.

1

Components of  ECI  Benefits  Costs

(Private ndustry  orkers;  twelve-month  change) i w

Insurance  Costs

Supplemental Pay

192

<!-- missing-text -->

84 8

6 8

1902 4

9 1996

9

Paid Leave

<!-- missing-text -->

Workers' Compensation  Insurance

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Retirement and Savings

Percent

<!-- missing-text -->

State  Unemployment Insurance

<!-- missing-text -->

CPI AND PPI INFLATION RATES (Percent change)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 3. Relative importance weight for  intermediate materials, December 1995.
- 4.  Relative importance weight for  crude materials, December 1995.

The acceleration in  average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers has been more pronounced than has the rise in wages and salaries for comparable workers in  the ECI. In December, average hourly earnings stood 4  percent above their year-earlier level--a full percentage point faster growth than over 1995. The chain-weighted average hourly earnings measure also has accelerated about 1  percentage point over the past year, suggesting that changes in  the industrial composition of the work force have not contributed to the acceleration in  the published average hourly earnings series. However, given the increase in  the average workweek between December 1995 and December 1996, some of  the acceleration in average hourly earnings may  be due to  an  increase in overtime hours--which is not counted as an  increase in compensation rates in the ECI.

In  addition to labor cost pressures, there have been substantial increases in energy prices. The CPI for energy rose 1.6 percent in  December, bringing the rise in 1996 to 8.6 percent. December's sizable increases in  the prices of  gasoline and  heating oil reflected rising crude oil prices and continued low inventories. Although stocks of  gasoline remained rather low in  early January, refiners have been able to boost inventories of  heating oil considerably in recent weeks, and these stocks now  stand close to year-earlier levels. Still, with the unusually cold weather in Europe spurring demand, the energy price situation is unlikely to improve markedly in  the near future.

Non-energy price increases have been quite modest of  late. Consumer food prices were up 0.1 percent in  December, after a 0.3 percent increase in  November and larger increases in  preceding months. At  earlier stages of  processing, the PPI for crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs declined again in December and has now completely reversed its run-up earlier in  the year. The recent freeze in  Florida will probably result in  a  temporary run-up in fresh fruit and vegetable prices. The CPI excluding food and energy also rose only 0.1 percent in December, as  small price increases were widespread. Prices of  new  vehicles were unchanged in  December, and apparel prices rose 0.1 percent on  a  seasonally adjusted basis following larger increases in  the preceding three months.

Over the year as a whole, core consumer prices increased 2.6 percent, down from a  3  percent rise over 1995 and the same as the increase over 1994. A  similar deceleration occurred in  core PCE prices, which we  estimate to have slowed to a  2  percent rate of

BROAD MEASURES OF INFLATION (Four-quarter percent change)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  1996:Q4 value is staff estimate.
- 2. Excludes housing.
- 1.  CPI; percent change from  the same period in the  prior year.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 3. Median increase for responses to  te  question above.
- 4.  Compiled by the  Federal Reserve Bak  of  Philadelphia.

increase over 1996. The comparatively small rise in core PCE prices relative to  the core CPI can be attributed to  a  variety of  factors, but the most important is the difference in  how  the two indexes treat prices of  medical services. Unlike most components of  PCE, medical prices do  not use the CPI as source data; rather, PCE medical prices are based on PPIs that attempt to  price a  treatment path rather than inputs, and these prices have increased more slowly than the CPI for medical services. (The CPI is about to change its method for measuring hospital prices--but not doctors' services--toward the treatment-path approach.) In  addition, medical services have a  much larger weight in PCE than in  the CPI--the latter only includes out-of-pocket medical care costs--which magnifies the effect of  the price slowdown in  the PCE index.

Unlike the core consumption price measures, increases in  both the overall PCE chain price index and the overall CPI accelerated over the past year, reflecting the sizable increases in  both food and energy prices. However, price increases for investment goods, exports, and government purchases all slowed last year, and we estimate that the GDP chain-type price index increased 2-1/4 percent over 1996. down a  bit from 2-1/2 percent over 1995.

Prices of  intermediate goods have yet to show the effects of the higher energy prices. As  measured by  the producer price index, increases in  prices of energy-intensive intermediate goods, such as plastics and chemicals, have been  moderate of late. Similarly, energy-intensive intermediate goods have not  been prominent on  the purchasing managers lists of goods whose prices are increasing.

Nor has the energy-driven acceleration in  the overall CPI led to rising inflationary expectations. Indeed, the  mean expected price increase over the next twelve months, as  measured by the Michigan survey, is  now running a  bit lower than it  was six months ago, and the median expected price increase is about unchanged from six  months ago. Similarly, the Conference Board's survey of inflation expectations over the next twelve months and the Philadelphia Fed's survey of inflation expectations over the next ten  years have remained flat in recent months.

Prices of  spot commodities have generally increased in recent weeks. Prices of  many  metals--especially steel scrap--have firmed of  late, and the Journal of Commerce index of  industrial materials is up about 1-1/2 percent since the last Greenbook. However, most farm commodity prices have remained low recently. The PPI for crude

Commodity Price Measures

Journal  of  Commerce Index

<!-- missing-text -->

KR-CRB Spot Industrials

<!-- missing-text -->

1985

1986

1987

1988

KR-CRB Futures

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Weekly data. uesdays.  Vertical  ines  n small  panels  indicate  eek of  last reenbook.  The Journal  of ommerce T l o w G C index  is ased almost b entirely  industrial mmodities,  with  a  small  weight  given  to nergy commodities,  and the  KR-CRB on co e spot  price ndex  consists ntirely  ndustrial i e ofi commodities,  excluding  energy. The KR-CRB futures ndex  gives bout a i a 60 percent  weight  to ood  commodities and splits  he  remaining  weight  rojghly f t equally  among energy  commodities, industrial  mmodities,  and precious etals.  Copyright  for  ournal  of  Commerce co m J data  is eld h by CIBCR,  1994.

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

materials less food and energy moved up in  December but remains more than 5  percent below its year-earlier level.

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

III-T-1

Selected  Financial arket Quotations  1 M

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day quotes  except s  noted. a
- 2.  Average  for  two-week reserve  aintenance eriod losest   date  shown.  Last  observation  he  average o  date  for  maintenance eriod m p c o ist t p ending  January 29, 1997.
- 3.  Secondary  market.
- 4.  Bid rates  or  Eurodollar  eposits  t 1  a.m. ondon time. f d a 1 L
- 5.  Most recent bservation  ased  on  one-day  Thursday  quote  and futures  arket  index  changes. o b m
- 6. Merrill  ynch Master  II  high-yield nd index  composite. L bo
- 7.  Quotes  for  week ending  Friday revious o  date  shown. p t
- * Figures ited re  as  of  the lose n December 16. c a c o

Selected  Interest  ates R

Short-Term

<!-- missing-text -->

Long-Term

<!-- missing-text -->

Since the December FOMC meeting, most readings on  the strength of economic activity have exceeded expectations, putting upward pressure on  interest rates. Although better-than-expected inflation reports and an  appreciating dollar have tempered the rise, long-term rates still have increased about a  quarter percentage point over the intermeeting period. The thirty-year Treasury yield has reached 6.9 percent--more than a  half point above its recent low at  the end of  November. Changes in short-term rates were mixed since midDecember: Treasury bill rates increased modestly, while private rates fell as the year-end premium disappeared. Quotes for federal funds futures contracts continue to suggest that market participants expect the Federal Reserve to  hold policy unchanged at the February FOMC meeting, but the perceived odds of  a  tightening by  the spring have moved up a  shade.

Despite the increase in long-term interest rates, stocks have risen on  net during the intermeeting period in reaction to surprisingly strong news on fourth-quarter earnings. Major stock indexes have increased 4  to 8  percent. Although the sharpest gains have been recorded for large companies, indexes that include the stocks of smaller firms, such as the Russell 2000, also set new highs through mid-January.

For the most part, financial intermediaries and the  markets appear willing to provide financing on  very favorable terms. The elevated price-earnings ratios in  stock markets have kept equity a cheap source of  finance, and spreads on junk bonds have narrowed further from already low levels. Recent survey data indicate that banks have continued to ease slightly underwriting standards on business loans and, more notably, terms. Although banks have tightened their standards for issuing credit cards, home equity loans have been promoted more heavily as an alternative.

The growth of  business and household debt slackened a  bit, on balance, late last year. While businesses borrowed heavily from banks over the fall and stepped up their net issuance of  bonds, paydowns of  commercial paper increased. In  the household sector, growth of  consumer credit fluctuated quite a  bit but remained well below the double-digit pace of  1995 and early 1996. Home mortgage borrowing appears to  have edged off in  the fourth quarter, in keeping with some softening of  housing activity, despite a  boost

Selected Short-Term  Futures Rates  and  Stock Market  Indexes

<!-- missing-text -->

Selected  tock  Indexes

S

<!-- missing-text -->

from home equity lending, which grew briskly. In contrast, state and local governments were active borrowers in  the fourth quarter, and the run-off of  tax-exempt debt seems to have run its course, as the retirements of  pre-refunded issues are tapering off.

Household Sector

Total household debt is estimated to have grown at an  annual rate of  about 6  percent in  the fourth quarter, a touch slower than during the third quarter. Consumer credit expanded near its moderate third-quarter pace, reversing an  outright run-off in September that was preceded by  robust growth in  July and August (table). Fourth-quarter information on  home mortgage debt is relatively sparse, but indicators suggest that growth was slightly below the pace of  the third quarter: Total real estate loans at banks grew a  bit more rapidly, but net issuance of  mortgage-backed securities plus portfolio purchases by  the government-sponsored agencies slowed marginally.

The slower pace of  consumer credit growth since the end of  1995 has been accompanied by  more rapid extensions of  home equity loans (chart, top panel). According to  the January Senior Loan Officer Survey, banks further tightened their terms and standards for approving new  credit card loans in response to rising delinquency and charge-off rates, but reported easing terms and standards, on net, for home equity loans, which in  most cases provide some measure of  collateralization. However, finance companies have provided the biggest boost to the expansion of  home equity debt; much of  this debt has been funneled into securitized pools (chart, lower left panel). To make inroads into the highly profitable credit card segment of consumer lending, finance companies have embraced home equity lending as a  logical extension of  their traditional business of  lending to individuals on a  largely unsecured basis. Home equity loans have been promoted, in part, as a  debt consolidation tool; relative to  credit card debt, such loans feature both lower interest rates and longer repayment periods, so these substitutions can reduce monthly payments substantially.

Although high-quality loans have constituted the bulk of home equity lending in past years, much of  the recent growth at finance companies has been fueled by subprime loans--that is, loans made with high loan-to-value ratios, or  to higher-risk borrowers, or both. To  be sure, rates for subprime home equity loans--averaging about 12 to  14 percent, by  some industry estimates--are higher than

Consumer Credit

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. nnual data  are averages of  quarterly  ata  for ommercial banks and of  monthly data  for inance  companies. A d c f
- 2.  Average of  most common rate  charged for pecified  ype  and maturity uring  the  first ek  of  the  middle  month  of  each quarter. s t d we
- 3.  Stated  APR  averaged across  all redit  ard  accounts at ll eporting anks during  the  period. c c a r b
- 4.  Average rate  for ll oans  of  each type,  regardless f  maturity,  ade  during he  period. a l o m t
- p Preliminary.  n.a.  Not available.

Consumer and Home Equity  Credit

Growth  in Consumer and  Home Equity  Loans

<!-- missing-text -->

Distribution   Home of Equity  Debt by Holder

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. First  hree  uarters,  n  annual ate. t q ata r

<!-- missing-text -->

A

Mo

Sources. merican Bankers  Association, ody's.

Commercial Bank  Credit

(Percent  change; seasonally djusted  annual rate) a

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Adjusted  for reaks caused by reclassifications.  thly levels re b Mon a pro  rata averages of  weekly (Wednesday)  levels.  uarQ terly  evels  not  hown)  are  simple  averages of onthly  levels.  nnual levels  not hown)  are  levels  or he  fourth uarter.  rowth rates l ( s m A ( s f t q G shown  are percentage changes in  consecutive  levels,  nnualized  but  not  compounded. a

- 1.  djusted  to  remove  effects  f  mark-to-market  accounting  rules FIN 39 and FASB A o ( 115).

- 3.  xcludes interbank oans. E l
- 4. Includes an estimate  of utstanding  loans  securitized  y  commercial banks. o b
- 5. Includes  security  oans, oans  to  farmers,  state nd local overnments, and all thers  not  elsewhere classified. o  includes l l a g o Als lease  financing eceivables. r

those on  their high-quality cousins, but they are generally a  few percentage points lower than rates on  credit card debt. The subprime loans that back the securitized pools have experienced delinquency rates that are far in  excess of  those for the mostly high-quality home equity loans made by  banks (chart, lower right panel). For the most part, banks themselves have not competed in the subprime market directly, but some mortgage lending subsidiaries of  bank holding companies are active participants in the subprime segment.

Money and Bank Credit

Bank credit, adjusted for  mark-to-market accounting effects, grew at an  annual rate of  about 4  percent in  December, somewhat slower than in November (table). Security holdings ran off  in December after having grown at a  9-1/4 percent rate in  November. However, loan growth accelerated from November's 4-1/4 percent pace, largely owing to a  spurt in  business loans and a  pickup in real estate lending.

After moderating in  November, business loans surged to a 17 percent rate last month, approaching the elevated pace of September and October. Although we  cannot account fully for the strength in  C&amp;I loans, a  stronger pace of  inventory investment in recent months likely has  boosted demand for bank loans. According to responses to  the January Senior Loan Officer Survey, lending associated with  mergers and acquisitions is also part of  the explanation. Reportedly, foreign banks in  particular have been active in  merger financing. Foreign banks increased their share of all business lending a  few percentage points over the latter half of 1996; however, U.S. offices of Japanese banks cut back sharply their business lending, perhaps in response to  their capital troubles and the associated rise in  their funding costs. In  January, business loan growth has dropped back somewhat.

Real estate lending quickened in  December, bolstered by increased bookings of residential mortgages and the shift toward home equity loans noted above. Consumer lending at  banks, adjusted for securitized loans, grew at  a  7-1/2 percent rate in  December and 7  percent for  the full fourth quarter, a  moderation from early 1996 that mirrors the trend of  overall consumer credit growth. For the fourth consecutive loan officer survey, a  small net fraction of banks indicated reduced willingness to  make consumer loans.

MONETARY AGGREGATES (Based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  sum  of seasonally adjusted M1,  retail money market funds, savings deposits, and  small time deposits.
- 3. Sum  of retail money funds, savings deposits, and  small time deposits, each seasonally adjusted separately.
- 4. Sum  of large time deposits, institutional money funds, RP  liabilities of  depository institutions, and Eurodollars held by U.S. addressees, each seasonally adjusted separately.
- 5. Net  of  holdings of depository institutions, money market mutual funds, U.S. government, and foreign banks and  official institutions.
- 6. Sweep figures used to  adjust these series are the estimated national total of  transaction account balances initially swept into  MMDAs owing to  the introduction of  new sweep programs, on  the  basis of  monthly averages of  daily data.
- 7. M2  less demand deposits
- 8. For  the  years shown, "average monthly change" is the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter dollar change, divided by  12. For the  quarters shown, it  is the quarter-to-quarter dollar change, divided by  3.

Note: Data incorporate revisions from the  annual benchmark andseasonal review. These data are scheduled to  be  published in  early February and  until that time are  strictly confidential.

According to reports now  in  for forty-five of  the fifty largest bank holding companies, commercial bank profits rose again in  the fourth quarter. Overall, net income was 25 percent greater than in the final quarter of  1995, largely as a  result of  a  10-basis-point widening of  the  net interest margin and increased fees, particularly those related to investment banking and asset securitization. Once again, problem credit card accounts were a  modest drag on  profits, and industry analysts expect some further deterioration.

The broad monetary aggregates grew rapidly in  December, and preliminary data suggest that growth in  January, while below the December pace, remained buoyant (table).1 M2  growth in  recent months has likely been boosted by  strong income growth and  the decline in  market interest rates since mid-1996. M3 has grown faster than M2, as banks continued to rely heavily on  managed liabilities in  M3  to fund loan growth. U.S. branches of  foreign banks have been particularly heavy issuers of  large time deposits in recent months, as they have experienced rapid asset growth and have reduced their use of  overseas funding. Despite continuing sweep activity in  December, M1 rose slightly. In  January, however, this aggregate appears headed for another sizable decline, the runoff being entirely attributable to  the implementation of  new  sweeps. Business Finance

Gross bond issuance by  nonfinancial corporations slowed in December as  long-term interest rates retraced some of  the decline posted during the preceding two months; nonetheless, the pace of issuance for the fourth quarter as a  whole was robust (chart, top panel). December's downshift also reflected the usual lull around the holidays--no bonds were sold during the final ten days of the month. Nonfinancial issuance remained slack in early January but has begun to  build more recently. Market participants note that the calendar of  new issues is expanding, and, judging by  the experience last fall and over the past several years (chart, bottom left panel), firms will jump into the market if  rates drop again.

During the fourth quarter, many bond offerings were earmarked to repay commercial paper, as firms sought to lock in  relatively low

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may  not  sum  to  totals because of  rounding.

- 1. These data include speculative-grade bonds issued privately under Rule 144A. All  other private placements are excluded. Total reflects gross proceeds rather than par  value of  original discount bonds.
- 2. Excludes equity issues associated with equity-for-equity swaps that have occurred in restructurings.
- 3. Bonds categorized according to  Moody's bond ratings, or  to  Standard &amp;amp; Poor's if  unrated by Moody's. Excludes mortgage-backed and  asset-backed bonds.

Nonfinancial  Corporations

Gross  Bond Issuance  nd  Baa Rate a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

long-term interest rates. In  December, however, these paydowns were more than offset by a pickup in  merger-related financing that boosted the amount of  outstanding nonfinancial commercial paper for the first time since June (chart, bottom right panel). Nonfinancial commercial paper issuance has strengthened further in January, bolstered by  merger needs.

Nonfinancial firms again retired equity on  net in  the fourth quarter, bringing the contraction for 1996 as a whole to  nearly $80 billion, similar to  that in 1995. Based on our estimates for the fourth quarter, completed share repurchases in 1996 were about 30 percent above the 1995 level (chart, upper left panel). Announcements of  new repurchase programs have jumped even more sharply, driven by  the accumulation of  excess cash at large companies. Merger-related share retirements also rose further last year (chart, upper right panel). Although most of  the large transactions were structured entirely or  largely as stock swaps, cash transactions were sizable and produced substantial retirements.

Although initial public offerings totaled $34 billion for  the year as a whole--more than two-thirds greater than the prior record in 1995--such issues slowed appreciably as the year progressed. Both IPOs and seasoned offerings dropped abruptly in  December, typical of  the holiday season, and remained subdued in  January.

The rally in stock prices over the intermeeting period pushed up price-earnings ratios even further (chart, middle left panel). Investors evidently shrugged off the rise in  bond rates, focusing instead on  the surprising strength in  fourth-quarter earnings reports. To date, 60 percent of  the S&amp;P 500 firms have issued reports, with almost 60 percent coming in  above expectations of market analysts and 30 percent below. Overall, operating earnings for the S&amp;P 500 are expected to  have grown roughly 11 percent over the four quarters of  1996, an  acceleration from earlier in  the year (chart, middle right panel). The reports of  higher earnings are consistent with the robust growth in real activity late this year, but the market reaction suggests that investors viewed the fourthquarter reports as signaling stronger earnings growth going forward.

The continued healthy growth in  corporate profits has been beneficial for credit quality. For the  fourth quarter and for 1996 as a  whole, Moody's upgrades of  nonfinancial debt issues far outnumbered downgrades (although they were similar when measured in terms of  the dollar volume of  affected bonds). Moreover, the rate

Corporate  Finances

Share Repurchases by U.S. Nonfinancial  Coporations

<!-- missing-text -->

*Staff stimates e

Source. Securities ata Company D

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. S&amp;P  500 ratio ased on consensus estimate b of  earnings  over  the  coming  12 months. Nasdaq  ratio based on earnings  over  the  previous  12 months.

<!-- missing-text -->

j

Note. Ratio  of unk  bond defaults  o unk  bonds

t

j

outstanding  at  end of  previous  year

Source.  Edward  Altman, CS First  oston. B

Merger-Related Equity  Retirements at U.S. Nonfinancial  orporations C

<!-- missing-text -->

Corporate  Profits

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

of  business failures from January through November of  1996 was low by  historical standards, and default rates on  speculative-grade bonds (chart, lower left panel) declined from  the  previous year.

The market for speculative-grade bonds has been especially robust. In  December, quality spreads over Treasury yields narrowed about 30  basis points, bringing the decline since the end of  1995 to somewhat more than 100 basis points. Spreads have narrowed despite the heavy issuance of  high-yield bonds, reflecting extraordinary demand for these issues, led by  record flows into junk bond mutual funds last year. The limited concern about credit risk has greatly enhanced market access for  the lowest-rated companies. Last year, nonfinancial issues rated B  or  lower accounted for almost 30  percent of  all nonfinancial bond offerings, the highest share since 1989 (chart, lower right panel). Many of  these firms are in  high-tech industries that hold out the prospect of  sharply increasing earnings. Nonetheless, these bonds would be  vulnerable if  earnings prove disappointing, and some market participants worry about the effects of  a  stock market correction that would discourage firms from issuing equity. Equity issuance has allowed many junk-grade firms to  decrease leverage over the past few  years, thereby improving their credit ratings and giving them better entree to  the bond market.

Mutual Funds

Inflows to equity mutual funds remain very strong: For all of 1996, net sales of  equity funds totaled about $223 billion, surpassing the previous record, set in 1993, by  nearly 75 percent. In  December, net sales of equity funds, excluding reinvested dividends, were a  little below the average monthly pace since midyear (chart, upper panel).2 Preliminary data for January indicate that flows into stock funds strengthened, likely driven in part by  a  confluence of  seasonal influences, most associated with the  management of  retirement accounts.

Net sales of  bond funds picked up in  December. As  was the case throughout 1996, high-yield and income funds fully accounted for

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Includes  precious  metals  funds, not shown elsewhere.
- 2. Calculated  as the  sum  of  "Growth and income" and "Income equity"  n  the  ICI  data. i
- e  Staff stimate. e

Source.  Investment  Company Institute.

<!-- missing-text -->

- *Cash and  short-term curities     percent  total  ssets. se asa of a Source: nvestment  ompany  Institute. I C

December's inflows to  bond funds and for the majority of  such flows in  the first half of  January. As  noted above, the appeal of  highyield funds likely reflects the improvement in corporate earnings and a  perceived decline in  default risk, while income funds have proved attractive because they invest a  portion of  their assets in equities. Accordingly, returns on  these funds have exceeded those on other bond funds.

In  December, liquidity ratios for equity funds averaged only 5-1/2 percent, the lowest since 1977 (chart, bottom panel). Although this statistic could be  taken as  an  indicator of  fund managers' views on  the prospects for further stock market gains, other factors are also involved. Much of  the downward trend in  the liquidity ratio in  recent years reportedly reflects a  growing reliance on  backup lines of  credit which have allowed funds to absorb more risk by  keeping a  greater share of fund assets fully invested. In addition, indexed funds, which hold minimal cash reserves, represent a  growing share of  total mutual fund assets. Treasury and Agency Financing

The Treasury will likely finance the projected $71 billion deficit this quarter by  borrowing about $58 billion in  the market and by  drawing down its cash balance by $13 billion (table). The steady shrinkage of  the federal budget deficit has reduced the borrowing needs of  the Treasury, which are now estimated to  be  about $130 billion for the 1997 calendar year. Strong revenues around the end of  the year also have led the Treasury to cut the size of  this quarter's two-year note and  weekly bill auctions.

On  Wednesday, January 29, the Treasury sold price index-linked securities for the first time in  an  auction of  ten-year notes worth $7  billion. As with Canada's inflation-indexed bond, the principal adjusts to changes in  the price index, while the coupon rate remains unchanged. Accordingly, investors are compensated for price level changes through gradually increasing coupon payments and receipt of the fully adjusted principal value at  maturity.

The Treasury plans quarterly auctions of  indexed debt; bidders will submit tenders in  terms of a  real yield, and winning bids will be awarded at the highest accepted yield. In the first sale, the winning bid equaled 3.45 percent. Reportedly, the first sale went well; demand was strong, with bids exceeding awards by  five to one. The security had traded on  a  "when-issued" basis, yielding 3-1/4 to 3-1/2 percent, although reports suggested that the  market was

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Data reported on a  payment basis. Details may  not sum  to  totals because of rounding.

- 1.  Accrued items, checks issued less checks paid, and other transactions.
- p Projection.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Excludes mortgage pass-through securities issued by  FNMA and FHLMC.

illiquid. While it  is tempting to interpret the difference between real and nominal yields as a  measure of  inflation expectations, the difference is not a  clean measure because nominal rates include an inflation risk premium that is absent from the real yields, while real yields likely include a  risk premium that reflects illiquidity in  the new  indexed-bond market.

Issuance by  federally sponsored agencies was subdued over the intermeeting period, as  the rise in interest rates discouraged refinancing. The Federal Home Loan  Bank was authorized by  federal regulators to sell inflation-indexed bonds; however, no  plans to sell such bonds have been announced.

Municipal Securities

Gross issuance of  long-term municipal securities was strong through mid-December and then entered the usual lull spanning yearend (table). Offerings have picked up lately, but January's total likely will be somewhat below December's. For 1996 as a whole, long-term gross issuance increased about 16 percent from the level in 1995, with both new  capital and refunding volume moving up. At the same time, retirements of  long-term issues fell about 10 percent, owing primarily to a  decline in  the amount of  maturing debt. Together, these developments slowed the run-off of outstanding long-term debt, to about $5  billion, down markedly from the $50 billion decline in  1995. Market analysts expect positive net issuance in  1997.

State and local credit rating upgrades surged to new  records in 1996, while downgrades were more limited than the previous year (chart, bottom panel). Analysts cite both conservative budget practices and the continued economic expansion as the primary factors behind the improvement in  overall credit quality. In fact, this improvement would have been even greater were it not for the difficulties of  public utilities, which are facing deregulation and alone accounted for  nearly 75 percent of  total municipal downgrades last year. For 1997, Standard &amp;  Poor's anticipates another net improvement in  ratings for the  municipal sector.

GROSS OFFERINGS OF  MUNICIPAL SECURITIES (Billions of dollars; monthly rates, not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Includes issues for public and private purposes.

- 1.  Includes all refunding bonds, not just advance refundings.

Rating  Changes for  Long-Term Municipal Debt

<!-- missing-text -->

APPENDIX

THE JANUARY SENIOR LOAN OFFICER OPINION SURVEY ON BANK  LENDING PRACTICES

The January 1997 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on  Bank Lending Practices posed questions about bank lending standards and terms, loan demand by  businesses and households, the recent rapid growth in  home equity loans, and  the use of  credit scoring models for small business lending.

The survey results suggest that competition for commercial credits remains stiff. Many of  the respondents reported that they had eased terms on  business loans over the past three months, citing pressure from other banks and  nonbanks as the cause. While competing aggressively on  loan terms, only a  few  banks said they had relaxed standards on  these loans. The survey also found little evidence of  looser standards for commercial real estate loans. Only a  few  banks, on  net, reported increased demand for business loans from large and  middle-market customers, although several reported greater demand from small businesses. Several domestic and many foreign respondents also experienced an increase in  demand for commercial real estate loans.

The results were consistent with the recent slowdown in consumer loan growth and the  marked pick-up in the growth of  home equity loans. A  large number of  banks said they had raised standards on credit card loans and many said they had done so for other consumer loans. However, several banks eased standards on home equity loans. In  addition, several banks reported weaker demand for consumer loans, but many experienced increased demand for home equity loans. The responses to special questions on  the survey suggest that much of  the recent rapid growth in home equity loans was a  result of  substitution for unsecured forms of  consumer credit. This shift reportedly has arisen from  bank promotions of  such substitution as  well as from  the initiative of  borrowers attempting to consolidate their debt.

Other special questions found that about two-thirds of  the respondents use credit scores in their small business lending. The scores are most commonly used as part of  the application process, often for automatic acceptance or rejection of applicants, and rarely for the setting of  loan terms.

Lending to  Businesses

The survey found a  slight easing of  lending standards for business loans over the  past three months (chart). For loans to large, middle-market, and small businesses, less than 10 percent of domestic banks indicated that they  had eased standards; about 5  percent of  foreign banks eased standards. Much larger fractions of  banks reported easing terms on  business loans. One-third of  the domestic respondents reported a  decrease in  the spreads of  loan rates over market rates for loans to large and middle-market firms, and about one-tenth reported narrower spreads for small businesses. Smaller net fractions eased other terms, including credit line costs, size of  credit lines, loan covenants, and collateralization requirements. Banks generally said they had  eased standards and terms to  meet competition from other banks and, to a  lesser extent,

from nonbank lenders. These results suggest a  similar degree of easing of standards and terms as found in  the  November survey.

Also as in  November, only slight net margins of  banks reported stronger demand for business loans. About 15 percent, on net, of domestic respondents reported increased demand for business loans from  small firms and somewhat fewer indicated increased demand from large or  middle-market firms. Demand was up  at about 10  percent of the foreign respondents. Banks attributed the increased demand from small firms to  plant and equipment investment and inventory financing needs. The increased demand from large and middle-market firms reportedly also derived somewhat from these factors but mainly from  greater merger and acquisition financing.

Only one domestic respondent, on  net, and two foreign respondents indicated an  easing of  standards on construction and land development loans. About 15 percent of  the domestic respondents and nearly one-third of  the foreign respondents experienced an increase in  demand for these loans.

Lending to  Households

For the fifth consecutive survey, significant fractions of banks said they had tightened standards on  consumer loans. Nearly 40 percent of  the banks, on  net, said they had tightened standards over the  past three months for approving new  credit card accounts, and over 20  percent tightened standards on other consumer loans. A small net fraction of  banks indicated less willingness to make consumer installment loans--the fourth survey in  a  row  to show a slight decline in  willingness to  make these loans (chart). Terms on credit cards tightened: About one-fourth of  the respondents, on net, lowered credit limits and a  few raised spreads. About 10 percent of  banks tightened spreads on other consumer loans. Other terms on  consumer loans were reportedly about unchanged. On  net, respondents reported a  slight decline in  demand for consumer loans.

Banks indicated a  slight tightening in standards for approving home mortgages over the  past three months and a  slight increase, on net, in  demand for  these loans. About 15 percent of  the banks reported easing standards for  home equity loans and similar fractions reported easing maximum loan-to-value levels. Smaller net fractions eased spreads and fees on  these loans.

The easing of  terms for home equity loans was reportedly a factor in the recent rapid growth in  these loans. About one-fourth of  the respondents said that easing terms on  home equity loans, including entering the  market for lowor  no-equity loans, had boosted the amount of  these loans on  their books. However, a significantly larger fraction of  the banks, about three-quarters, said that encouraging specific customers to switch from  unsecured consumer loans to  home equity loans had boosted home equity outstandings. About three-quarters also said increased demand for these loans was a  factor in the recent growth.

Those banks that had followed policies to increase their holdings of  home equity loans said they did so because the increased riskiness of, and the increased competition for, unsecured consumer loans had made the risk-adjusted yield on  home equity loans relatively more attractive. Those banks that experienced increased

demand for home equity loans attributed the increase to  debt consolidation and to the increased credit needs of  their customers.

Credit Scores and Small Business Loans

Special questions on  the survey examined respondents' use of credit scores for small business lending. Two-fifths of  the respondents said they always use credit scores when making small business loans, and one-fourth said they sometimes use them. Of those banks that used credit scores, two-fifths used them for  the automatic acceptance or  rejection of  some applications and nearly all used them as part of  the evaluation process other than automatic acceptance or rejection. Two-fifths of  the banks used the scores to evaluate existing loans. Only a  few of  the banks--15 percent--used the scores to set loan terms. Most of  the banks purchase their scores, although one-fourth used scores from an  internally developed credit scoring model.

Only two of  the respondents reported having securitized any small business loans, and these two had securitized only SBAguaranteed loans. One of  these banks said the use of credit scores had not facilitated the securitization of  the loans, and the other bank said scoring had helped, but only slightly.

Measures of  Supply and  Demand for  C&amp;I  Loans, by Size of  Firm Seeking  Loans

Net Percentage of  Domestic  Respondents  Tightening  Standards for C&amp;I Loans

<!-- missing-text -->

=1

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Measures of  Supply  and  Demand for  Loans  to  Households

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

U.S. International Trade in  Goods and Services

The U.S. deficit in  trade in  goods and services was about the same in  November as in  October as both exports and imports rose slightly. The size of these two deficits was considerably smaller than in  any  month since June and about the same, at an annual rate, as in  the first quarter of  1996. Trade data for December will be released on  February 19.

<!-- missing-text -->

Exports of  goods and services reached record levels (AR)  in October-November and were 5  percent higher than in  the third quarter. The increase was spread among all major trade categories except automotive products (which were held down by  the effects of strikes against GM). Aircraft and service exports rebounded from low  third-quarter levels. Exports of machinery and industrial supplies moved to  new record levels. Over the past year, the value of  merchandise exports rose 6  percent. Most of the rise went to Canada and Latin America (to  Mexico, and especially in the second half of  the year, to countries in South America). Exports to Western Europe and Asia were only marginally higher than a  year earlier. [Note: NIPA data charted on the  next page were available only through 1996-Q3 on  Greenbook day. Data for 1996-Q4 will be released on January 31.]

Imports of  goods and services in October-November (AR)  were only slightly higher than in the  third quarter as declines in automotive imports from Canada (which were affected to a  larger extent than automotive exports by strikes against GM)  nearly offset

U.S. International rade  in  Goods T and  Services

(Seasonally  adjusted  annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

U.S. EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES (Billions of  dollars, SAAR, BOP basis)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source. U.S. Dept. of  Commerce, Bureaus of  Economic Analysis and Census.

increases in a  wide range of other trade categories, especially imported consumer goods, machinery (other than computers and semiconductors), and services. Over the past year imports rose 7-1/2 percent with the increases spread over most major trade categories. Exceptions were imports of  semiconductors, which declined sharply through most of  the  year and have only begun to move back up, and automotive products from Canada. Oil Imports

The  value of  imported oil in  October-November was about the same (AR)  as in the third quarter, as a  10 percent drop in quantity was offset by  a  sharp increase in price. The quantity of  oil imported fell 10.5 percent (1.05 mb/d) on  average during OctoberNovember after rising 2.0 percent during the third quarter. Weaker consumption accompanied by  the normal seasonal stock drawdown led to the lower rate of oil imports. Preliminary Department of  Energy statistics for December indicate that oil imports rebounded in response to stronger consumption in  December but have remained below their third-quarter pace.

Prices of  imported oil were significantly higher in  the fourth quarter than in the third quarter. Prices rose 7  percent in October and remained at or  above that higher level through year-end. The price of  imported oil now  stands 37 percent above its December 1995 level. The  price of  spot WTI rose $1.68 per barrel in  December after declining $1.20 per barrel in  November. Skirmishes in the Kurdish region of  Northern Iraq, strikes in France that have interrupted refinery operations, and concern over the level of heating oil stocks in  the United States and Europe because of extremely cold weather in  Europe helped push prices up  in December. Deliveries of  oil from Iraq put downward pressure on prices during January, offsetting the effects of  the cold winter. The  price of spot WTI remains quite volatile and is trading in the $23-25 per barrel range.

Prices of  Non-oil Imports and Exports

Prices of  U.S. non-oil imports increased slightly in  December after two consecutive months of  decline. Most of  the increase was attributable to  higher prices for non-oil industrial supplies, and to a  lesser degree, automotive vehicles and consumer goods. For the fourth quarter, non-oil import prices declined only slightly, as

<!-- missing-text -->

Oil  Prices

<!-- missing-text -->

SUMMARY OF  U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS of no ad e a

(Billions    dollars, t  seasonally justed  xcept s  noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. The sum of  official capital, private  pital, ca the  current  ccount alance, nd the  statistical a b a discrepancy is  zero. Details may not  sum  to totals because of  rounding.

- 3.  Includes  reasury  ills. T b
- 4.  Includes  .S. goverment  agency  bonds. U
- 5.  Transactions nonbanking  concerns  and other  anking  and official by b transactions  t  shown elsewhere no plus  amounts resulting  om fr adjustments made  by  the  Department of Commerce and  revisions in  lines 1 through 5 since  publication of the  quarterly data  in the  Survey of Current Business.

n.a.  Not  available.

* Less  than  $50  million.

increases in  prices of  industrial supplies and automotive products offset declines in  other categories.

Prices of exports remained unchanged in December, primarily because the continuing decline in  prices of  agricultural products offset the rise in  prices of  nonagricultural exports. In the fourth quarter, prices of  agricultural exports dropped 32 percent at  an annual rate. Prices of  nonagricultural exports rose slightly in  the fourth quarter with increases spread among all major trade categories except computers and semiconductors.

U.S. International Financial Transactions

Foreign official reserve assets in the United States rose by $15 billion in  November (line 1  of  the Summary of  U.S. International Transactions table). This increase is entirely attributable to countries outside of  the G-10. Spain, Brazil, China, and Taiwan all recorded substantial increases. Partial data for December from FRBNY show a  further increase in  foreign official reserves of $13 billion. Again, the increase came from countries outside the G-10. OPEC reserves rose as did those of  China, Spain, and several Latin American countries.

Foreign private purchases of  U.S. securities remained strong in  November (line 4). Of  the $31 billion in net purchases in  the month, roughly one half was in  Treasury securities, one-sixth in agency securities, and most of the rest in corporate bonds. These proportions are similar to  the year 1996 through November. As is generally the case, about half of  the foreign purchases of corporate and agency bonds in November (line 4b) were recorded in the  United Kingdom. Japanese residents recorded net purchases of about $2  billion in  November, slightly above their average share for the year through November.

Of  the $17 billion in  foreign purchases of  Treasuries in November (line 4a), almost $13 billion was attributable to  offshore financial centers in  the Caribbean. Purchases and sales of Treasuries by  these centers tend to  be large and volatile, and they have shown little net accumulation over the course of 1996.

Transactions by  these offshore centers are also reflected in the monthly movements of  international bank flows, as  U.S. banks and securities dealers provide some of  the financing for these purchases. Of  the $25 billion net outflow recorded by  banking

INTERNATIONAL BANKING DATA (Billions    dollars) of

1

<!-- missing-text -->

Line  3a  is  an average of  daily  data

(FR

2050)

supplemented by

the  FR

2502

and  end-of- quarter

data  supplied by

the  Bank  of Canada and  the  Bank  of England.

There is  a break  in

the  series in  April

1994.

Lines 4 and 5 are  end-of-period data  estimated by BEA on  the  basis  of data  provided by the  BIS,  the  Bank  of England, and  the  FR 2502 and  FFIEC  002s. They  include some  foreigncurrency denominated deposits and  loans. Source: SCB

offices in  November (line 3)  roughly half is attributable to lending by  securities dealers.

Smoothing through the monthly swings, there have been large net outflows through banking transactions over the course of the year. As shown in  line 1  of  the International Banking Table, on a monthly average basis, U.S. banking offices increased their net claims on related foreign offices and IBFs by  almost $30 billion during 1996. In addition, Eurodollar holdings of  U.S. non-bank residents increased substantially during the year (line 3). BEA has not fully incorporated the increase in  Eurodollar holdings into the accounts for the third quarter, which explains part of  the large negative statistical discrepancy in  that quarter (last line of the Summary Table).

U.S. private purchases of foreign bonds slowed markedly in November, while purchases of foreign equities remained at roughly their subdued third-quarter pace (lines 5a and 5b of the Summary Table). Large net securities purchases in Asia, outside of  Japan, were offset by  sales in the Caribbean.

Foreign Exchange Markets

The weighted-average value of  the dollar in  terms of  the other G-10 currencies has risen 4-3/4 percent since the December 17 FOMC meeting. The dollar strengthened 6-3/4 percent against the yen and 5-3/4 percent against the mark and most other ERM currencies. The dollar appreciated 2-1/2 percent on balance against sterling, but depreciated 1-1/2 percent against the Canadian dollar.

Concerns over the near-term health of  the Japanese economy and the  attendant implications for Japanese monetary policy have contributed to the dollar's rise against the yen. These concerns appear to  be  related to the restrictive budget for the fiscal year beginning in  April that was approved by  the Japanese cabinet in late December. In  addition, renewed worries about the financial condition of  Japanese banks may have weighed on  the  yen. "Verbal intervention" by  Japanese officials in January did little to reverse the yen's decline.

The dollar's strength over the intermeeting period against the mark and other ERM  currencies is  related to  the apparent divergence in  economic activity between the United States and most continental European countries. Recent data releases in the United States have

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Change  is  in  percentage points. P

Preliminary.

suggested  an  acceleration in U.S.  economic  activity. In contrast, recent  economic indicators  in most  continental European countries generally have  been weaker than market  expectations. As  suggested by implied yields  on Euromark futures  contracts, market participants now expect Bundesbank policy, especially in 1998,  to be less restrictive than they did  at the time of the December 17  FOMC meeting.

The dollar appreciated against sterling as  recent data  on U.K. manufacturing output and  retail  sales  suggested that  the economy was not  expanding as  rapidly as  the market had feared. The reduced concern about excessive growth, in conjunction with lower-thanexpected retail  price inflation in December, appear to have diminished expectations of a near-term tightening by the Bank of England.

Foreign short-term interest  rates were little changed over the intermeeting period as monetary policy remained on hold in most foreign countries. On January 21  the Bank of Italy  reduced its discount rate by 3/4 percentage point to 6-3/4  percent following the release of benign inflation data. The easing was widely expected, although the reduction came about  1 month sooner than expected. Foreign long-term interest rates declined about 5 basis points  on a weighted-average basis  as foreign economic activity appeared to decelerate.

Since the  last  FOMC meeting, the  Japanese stock market  (as measured by the TOPIX index) has  declined 10  percent due to concerns about the near-term outlook for the  Japanese economy, discussed previously. Prices of Japanese bank shares, which slid  22  percent over the intermeeting period, have also been depressed by renewed worries  about the effect of financial deregulation on  the profitability  of Japanese banks.

The Desk did not  intervene in the foreign exchange market over the intermeeting period.

Developments  in Foreign Industrial Countries

Economic  activity in the major foreign industrial  countries on average appears  to have continued to expand at  a moderate  rate  in

the fourth quarter. Recent indicators suggest strong performances in  Japan, Canada, and the United Kingdom, while growth appears to have slowed in the major continental European countries. Forwardlooking indicators are mixed, with measures of  business sentiment up on  balance in  the fourth quarter in Canada, Japan, Germany, and France, but down a  little in  the United Kingdom as a  result of  a less optimistic outlook for exports, and still quite weak in Italy.

Unemployment rates remain high in  most countries (with  the notable exception of  the United Kingdom), and consumer price inflation has generally stayed low. Prices are currently little changed from year-ago levels in  Japan and are up  less than 2  percent in Germany and France and only slightly more in Canada. Italian inflation is currently running at just over 2-1/2 percent, about half the rate recorded a  year ago. In  contrast, underlying inflation in  the United Kingdom edged above 3 percent on  a  twelvemonth basis in  December.

Individual country notes. In Japan, available information points to renewed expansion in the fourth quarter following a  weak third quarter. Virtually all indicators, including industrial production, housing starts, machinery orders, and new car registrations have shown large gains in  recent months. The ratio of job offers to applicants increased in  November to its highest level in three years, and the unemployment rate has held steady although many workers have quit their jobs in  search of  better positions. The Bank of  Japan's November survey (Tankan) registered a  modest improvement in  business sentiment at  major manufacturers and confirmed the findings of the May and August surveys that capital spending plans are improving.

Consumer prices remain stable, although the recent further depreciation of  the yen appears to  be contributing to some pickup in wholesale prices. Japan's merchandise trade balance rose sharply in the fourth quarter, to $17.1 billion, despite a  large increase in the price of  imported oil. However, the balance for the year 1996 was $61.8 billion, down substantially from $106.6 billion in 1995.

The cabinet approved a  supplementary budget for fiscal year 1996 (ending in  March) and an initial budget for fiscal year 1997 to be presented to the Diet this month. The proposed budgets imply a fiscal contraction of  about 1-1/2 percent of GDP this year. This

contraction is due almost entirely to tax increases, including an end to  the temporary income tax rebate (effective January 1) and an  increase in the consumption tax  by  2  percentage points (effective April 1). Government purchases are expected to decline by  3/4 percent of  GDP, but transfer payments should increase by  nearly as much.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Percent of manufacturing firms  having a favorable view  of business

- 3. Percent change from  previous year.

The government continues to stress the importance of bureaucratic and economic reform. Prime Minister Hashimoto has lent his support to  measures that would increase the independence of the Bank of  Japan and establish a  depository institutions supervisory agency independent of  the Ministry of  Finance. Prospects for serious reform of  the financial sector appear to have improved. The proposed reforms would encourage greater competition and efficiency with fewer regulatory restrictions.

German economic activity appears to  have slowed in the fourth quarter following a  half-year of above-trend growth. Industrial production in  October and November was a  little below its thirdquarter average, while the unemployment rate continued to rise, reaching a  new  postwar high in  December. Forward-looking indicators are  mixed. New  orders for manufactured goods in  October and November were little changed on  average relative to their third-

quarter level following substantial increases in  the two previous quarters. The IFO business climate index improved on average in the fourth quarter, and capacity utilization in  manufacturing registered another small gain. Twelve-month inflation remains low, registering a  little under 1-1/2 percent in  December. Consumer prices in  the western states rose 1.8 percent over the  year to  January, but this appears to have been largely due to  higher energy prices and is expected to be  temporary.

<!-- missing-text -->

The German government estimates a  general government budget deficit-to-GDP-ratio of  3.9 percent for 1996, and projects a  ratio of 2.9 percent for 1997, just below the Maastricht reference value of  3  percent. The 1997 projection has been revised up from 2.5 percent incorporated into the  budget passed by  the parliament in December, reflecting higher estimated levels of  unemployment. In response, it is expected that a  freeze on large federal expenditures will be imposed, similar to  measures that have been taken in  the two previous years.

In France, real GDP is likely to have fallen a  little in  the fourth quarter as a  result of  a  drop in  the number of  working days, as  well as a  decline in  auto output following the expiration of  an

auto incentive scheme at the end of  September. Consumer confidence stabilized last quarter, but was still low, reflecting general discontent with the government, while the unemployment rate has continued to rise, reaching 12.7 percent in  November. Producers' expectations of future output improved a  little in the fourth quarter, while inventories appear to have returned to a  more normal level following a  sizable decumulation last year. Twelve-month consumer-price inflation has remained low, averaging about 1-3/4 percent through December.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Percent balance of  respondents citing an  improvement in the  outlook versus those  citing a worsening.
- 3. Percent change from  previous year.

Recent indicators suggest that economic activity in the United Kingdom continues to expand at  a  healthy pace. Real GDP growth picked up  to 3  percent (SAAR) in  the fourth quarter on the strength of services, construction, electricity output, and oil extraction. Retail sales were up  a  robust 1 percent for the fourth-quarter on average, despite a  drop in December. The unemployment rate fell to 6.7 percent in December, its lowest level since early 1991. However, some of  the decline in registered unemployment in the fourth quarter is the result of recent changes to  the unemployment benefit system. In  the current quarter, surveys of  consumer confidence rebounded in  January to the  high level recorded in November. Surveys of  manufacturers in  January suggest a  slower

pace of  expansion, with continued strength in  domestic demand, particularly for consumer goods, while optimism about export orders dropped considerably.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Percent change from  previous year.

Retail prices excluding mortgage interest payments rose 3.1 percent in  December from a  year earlier, well above the government's target rate of 2-1/2 percent or less. Excluding fuel, the twelvemonth change in retail prices was more moderate in  December--about 2-3/4 percent--and has edged down over the past year. The underlying rate of  increase of  average earnings remained at 4  percent in November for the fifth consecutive month, while producer input prices in  December dropped considerably below year-earlier levels, in part as a  result of  the appreciation of  the pound last year.

In Italy, third-quarter real GDP growth was revised up  to 2.4 percent, compared with 2  percent in  the preliminary release. The government has recently announced tax incentives for auto purchases in an  attempt to stimulate durable goods spending, which fell in the third quarter.

Available monthly indicators point to  a  weak fourth quarter. Industrial output in  October and November was about unchanged relative to the third-quarter level, while industrial orders dropped in October and business sentiment has remained gloomy. Consumer

confidence rose in  January but remained below the levels recorded earlier last year. Meanwhile, inflation has stabilized. In January, the consumer price index was up 2.6 percent on  a  year-overyear basis for the third consecutive month.

SAAR)

<!-- missing-text -->

In response to the stagnant economy and declining inflation, the Bank of Italy on January 21 lowered its official rates for the third time since July. Both the discount and Lombard rates, which currently stand at 6-3/4 percent and 8-1/4 percent respectively, are at their lowest levels since September 1975.

<!-- missing-text -->

On  December 21, the Senate approved the 1997 budget, which includes a  $41 billion equivalent deficit reduction package. The package aims to reduce Italy's 1997 fiscal deficit to 3  percent of GDP. On  January 2, the government announced that the preliminary 1996 budget deficit as a  share of  GDP  was 7.5 percent, an  overrun of close to three quarters of  one percent from the latest official target.

In  Canada, recent indicators suggest that economic activity expanded at a  healthy pace in  the fourth quarter. Retail sales increased sharply in  both October and November, and were 2  percent above their third-quarter level on average. If sustained, this would be  the strongest quarterly increase in two years. The index of  consumer attitudes also continued to rise, while the index of business confidence reached a  record high.

<!-- missing-text -->

Manufacturing shipments fell in October but recovered in November, reflecting large swings in shipments of  motor vehicles and parts as a  result of  the Canadian GM  strike. For October and November on  average, both shipments and new factory orders were slightly below the third-quarter average. Although employment edged

up in  both November and December, the unemployment rate remained high in  the fourth quarter. Headline consumer price inflation rose a  little more in  December, but remains close to the  midpoint of  the Bank of Canada's target range of  1-3 percent.

<!-- missing-text -->

Industrial roduction in  Selected Industrial ountries P C

(Monthly  data;  easonally justed; tio  cale,  ndex) s ad ra s i

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer Price Inflation  n  Selected Industrial ountries i C

(12-month change)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

France

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

United  Kingdom

<!-- missing-text -->

Canada

<!-- missing-text -->

Economic Situation in Other Countries

In  Latin America, the strong expansion in economic activity in Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil continues, and prospects for Venezuela also look slightly better. In  Asia, output growth, although still high, has slowed somewhat in  China, but prospects look better for Taiwan, which seems to  have recovered from a  mild slowdown earlier in  the year. The situation in  Korea is uncertain as  nationwide strikes have disrupted economic activity. In  Russia, economic activity has continued to decline, but the pace of  decline has  been slowing.

Inflation for 1996 in  the developing economies varied considerably across countries, but is generally on  a  downward trend. The fall in inflation rates for 1996 to single-digits in Brazil and China is  notable, and Argentine prices were almost flat. Russian inflation also declined sharply in 1996. External balances have deteriorated in  Mexico, Brazil, and Korea. For Mexico and Brazil this reflects the pick-up in  aggregate demand. In  Korea, it is the result of  a  slump in semi-conductor exports, combined with a  rise in the value of  oil imports due to  higher international crude prices. In Taiwan, Argentina, and Venezuela, external balances have improved owing to  a  relatively weak domestic economy in  Taiwan, strong export growth in  Argentina (caused partly by  strong Brazilian demand), and high oil prices in  Venezuela. In  China, the trade surplus was down relative to 1995, but exports picked up in  the second half of 1996.

Individual country notes. On  January 15, the government of Mexico repaid early the remaining $3.5 billion in  emergency loans from the United States government (out of  a  maximum of  $12.5 billion outstanding in  mid-1995) and repaid $1.5 billion to the International Monetary Fund (reducing to less than $10-1/2 billion the amount owed on the $13 billion in drawings on  the 1995 stand-by arrangement). The repayments were financed by  borrowing from the private financial markets over the past several months and by revenues from PEMEX, the state oil company. The  Mexican government is currently negotiating an  Extended Fund Facility with the IMF  that is likely to  be for about $4  billion.

Economic data have continued to show a  rebound in  the Mexican economy. Industrial production was nearly 12 percent higher in November than it  was a  year earlier. The  unemployment rate declined

to  4.1 percent in  December from 5.5 percent in December 1995. Data on  the components of  GDP in  the third quarter of 1996 showed a  28 percent increase in investment spending from a  year earlier and a more modest 5  percent increase in consumption, while net exports declined sharply from a  year earlier. Those figures highlight the fact that the recovery is  now being driven by  a  pickup in  domestic demand, with net exports providing a  negative contribution to  GDP as imports accelerate and export growth slows. Trade data for December showed a  continued narrowing of  the trade surplus, as strong imports outweighed the continued positive effect of  high oil prices on oil exports.

<!-- missing-text -->

Monthly inflation surged to 3.2 percent in December as the seasonal effects of  greater spending and bonuses paid during the Christmas season were exacerbated by  the 17 percent increase in the minimum wage, an  8  percent increase in  gasoline prices, and a  20-50 percent increase in public transportation fares in  Mexico City. The 5  percent net depreciation of  the peso during October may also have added to the inflation uptick at  year-end.

In  Argentina, output growth is strong and there is  virtually no inflation. Industrial production was up 10.9 percent in December from a  year-earlier. Consumer prices fell in  December, and Argentina ended 1996 with almost zero consumer price inflation for the  year. However, unemployment remains very high and is up slightly, reported at 17.3 percent in  the October survey. To alleviate the situation, President Menem recently used executive

decrees to  make some labor reforms. The unions challenged these in court and won, but the government will appeal.

Despite the strong growth, the trade balance has not deteriorated. Strong Brazilian demand has kept growth of  Argentine exports high, and the trade surplus for January-November 1996 stood at $3.5 billion, up from $2.5 billion over the same period in 1995. International reserves (excluding gold) were at a  record high of  $18 billion at  the end of  December, up from $14 billion at the end of November. The sharp December increase was due to heavy government debt issuance in  anticipation of 1997 financing needs and a  seasonal increase in  the private sector's demand for pesos. The government has also issued a  $2  billion global bond in  January and plans to issue another $1  billion in other bonds before the end of  March.

<!-- missing-text -->

The current fiscal situation remains in control but is likely to  be complicated down the road by another court ruling. The Convertibility Plan had discontinued the indexation of  pension payments to cost of  living changes, but the Supreme Court has now ruled that back payments must be  made. These payments, which the government said it  will honor, will cost about $3.5 billion. Argentina has agreed with the IMF on  a  three-year Extended Fund Facility arrangement to take over from the current stand-by accord, which will expire at the end of  1997.

In  Brazil, monthly indicators suggest that economic activity continued to expand in  the fourth quarter of  1996, but at  a  slower pace than in the third quarter, when real GDP grew  by  over 11 percent (s.a.a.r.). Consumer price inflation slowed from 22 percent

in 1995 to roughly 9-1/2 percent in 1996 (December-over-December), the lowest 12-month increase in 40  years. Inflation has been remarkably low despite the government's slow progress enacting fiscal reforms.

<!-- missing-text -->

Strong aggregate demand contributed to a  deterioration in the trade balance in the second half of 1996. As a  result, Brazil's trade deficit widened from $3.2 billion in 1995 to $5.5 billion in 1996. The current account deficit in 1996 widened to $24.3 billion, roughly 3-1/4 percent of GDP. The deterioration in  the external balance in recent months has renewed concerns over the loss of international competitiveness since the stabilization program was launched in  mid-1994. (In real terms, the currency has appreciated by  25 percent since mid-1994, most of which occurred over the first year.) The Brazilian government has maintained that the current exchange rate policy, under which the  domestic currency has depreciated slowly against the dollar in  nominal terms within a  wide band since mid-1995, will not be altered. (As  of  mid-January, the real/dollar exchange rate stood at 1.04, near the upper limit of 1.06.) International reserves stood at $60.1 billion at  the end of December, down slightly from November, but well above the recent low of  $32 billion that was registered in early 1995.

In  Venezuela, growth prospects for the non-oil sector look better with the continuation of  free-market reforms. The recent auctioning of  the second and fourth largest Venezuelan banks and the sale of  a  40 percent stake in  the country's largest bank will create much-needed competition in  the country's financial sector. While

continuing the reforms, the Venezuelan government has decided not to use the remainder of its $1.4 billion stand-by IMF loan facility. Boosted by  oil revenues, the trade balance (including oil) was around $9  billion for January-September 1996, compared with $5.5 billion for the same period in 1995, and the central government budget for 1996 is  expected to show a  surplus of  about 1  percent of GDP. International reserves (excluding gold) were $11.8 billion at the  end of  1996, almost double from a  year ago.

<!-- missing-text -->

Concerns about inflation remain. Although inflation has  been trending downward from about July 1996, the year as a  whole saw consumer prices rise by 103 percent, roughly twice the inflation seen in 1995. There is also concern that the bolivar is overvalued. In July the government established a  central parity of  470 bolivars per dollar, with the bolivar to  be depreciated at 1.5 percent per month in line with the government's inflation target. However, the government has not allowed the bolivar to depreciate much. The central parity was adjusted at  the end of  December, but only to 472.5 bolivars per dollar.

Real GDP growth in  China slowed to 9.7 percent in 1996, after average growth of  more than 12 percent from 1992-95. Although China's tight monetary policy since the  middle of  1993 resulted in  a marked deceleration in  investment spending in 1994-95, investment growth appears to  have picked up since the middle of 1996. The 12month consumer price inflation rate fell to 6.9 percent in  November, compared with 25.5 percent in 1994. The trade surplus of $12.2 billion was down from a  surplus of  nearly $17 billion in 1995. The surplus largely reflected a  pickup in  exports in  the second half of 1996; exports fell 8  percent in  the first half from their year-

earlier level, but rose 10 percent in  the second half. China's foreign exchange reserves rose to $107 billion at the end of  1996, up from $75 billion a  year earlier.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  December and January, eight foreign banks, including Citibank, received permission to conduct local currency business in Shanghai. Previously, foreign banks in China were permitted to engage in foreign-currency transactions only. Officials in  Shanghai have consistently urged central authorities to allow greater activity by  foreign financial firms, as a  step towards consolidating Shanghai's position as China's financial center.

In Taiwan, economic activity appeared to recover in  the fourth quarter of  1996 from a  mild slowdown earlier in  the year. Industrial production, which had declined in the first half of 1996 from a  year earlier, rose nearly 5  percent in the fourth quarter. In  October, the unemployment rate reached 3.1 percent, its highest level since 1986, but fell slightly to 2.9 percent in  November. Inflation remained low, with consumer prices rising 2.5 percent in 1996. Taiwan's trade surplus rose to $14.3 billion in 1996, as a relatively weak domestic economy led to a  2  percent fall in the dollar value of  imports compared with 1995; exports grew 4  percent. Foreign exchange reserves stood at $88 billion at the end of November, up from its recent low of  $83 billion in  March 1996, following Chinese missile tests near Taiwan.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  Korea, nationwide labor strikes have disrupted economic activity since December 26 when the government passed two new laws. The first would have altered Korea's labor market to allow employers to lay off workers, replace strikers, and implement flexible work hours, and the second would have restored power to  a  controversial domestic intelligence agency. On  January 20, President Kim  agreed to send both laws back to Parliament to re-open the debate on  them.

According to preliminary data, Korea's trade deficit in 1996 exceeded $23 billion; its trade deficit with the United States alone was over $11 billion, higher than the total trade deficit for 1995. Industrial output rose 9.8 percent in November from its year-earlier level, compared with 10.9 percent in  October. Consumer prices in December were 4.5 percent above their year-earlier level.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  Russia, the economy and economic reform are muddling along as  President Boris Yeltsin, having recovered from quintuple bypass surgery, is now  said to be  recovering from pneumonia. Indications are  that real economic activity has continued to decline, but the rate of decline has been slowing. In  fact, although official statistics indicate an output decline of about six percent in 1996, some observers believe that growth in 1996 was actually positive,

but that weakness in  Russian statistics and accounting for the rapidly developing private sector hides an  important part of  growth. Inflation for 1996 as a  whole came in at 22 percent. The rubledollar exchange rate remained well within the corridor set by  the Central Bank, which has announced a  corridor for 1997 that allows for between three and fifteen percent depreciation during 1997. The Central Bank is predicting inflation of  around 12 percent for 1997. However, the government also intends to  allow the money supply to expand by  30 percent.

<!-- missing-text -->

Disbursements on  Russia's three-year, $10 billion IMF Extended Fund Facility were halted in  October and November, but have been moving back on track. The IMF's chief concern has been Russia's failure to  meet its revenue targets. Although figures for 1996 as a whole have not been announced, they are expected to  be  around 90 percent. IMF attention is now  turning to Russia's 1997 budget, which will be presented for its final reading in the Duma next week.