Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS III FOMC

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Consumer Sentiment

According to the preliminary report for May, the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment fell three points to  an index level close to the lower end of the relatively favorable range seen since early 1994. Respondents reported less favorable views of both current and expected conditions.

Among questions not included in the overall index, results were mixed in early May. Considerably fewer households said that they expect an  increase in unemployment over the coming year. In addition, the indexes of  buying conditions for cars and houses both rebounded a  bit after posting large declines in  April. However, respondents expressed noticeably less willingness to use credit to make large purchases.

Respondents reported higher expectations of inflation over both the coming year and the next five to ten years in early May. The mean level of expected inflation over the coming year rose 1/2 percentage point in early May to 5  percent, and the median level rose 0.1 percentage point to 3.1 percent. The mean level of expected inflation over the next five to  ten years rose 0.7 percentage point to 4.8 percent; the median level rose 0.3 percentage point to 3.3 percent. The  medians of both inflation measures are currently at their highest values in  more than a  year.

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not  seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and  buying conditions are the  percent reporting 'good  times' (or 'better') minus the percent reporting 'bad  times' (or  'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is  the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise  minus the fraction expecting unemployment to  fall.

THE FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Erratum

On  page I-13 in Part 1  of the Greenbook, the first sentence of the third paragraph should read: "The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand about 4-1/2 percent this year and next, slightly less than nominal GDP."

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations' M

e

(Percent  xcept as  noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  One-day  quotes  except  s  noted. a
- 2.  Average for wo-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest   date hown.  Last bservation  verage  maintenance  eriod o ate t m p c to s o isa p t d May 22,1996.
- 3.  Secondary  market.
- 4. Bid rates  or urodollar  eposits  t  11 a.m. ondon time. f E d a L
- 5.  Most  recent  bservation  ased  on  one-day  Thursday uote nd  futures  arket  index hanges. o b q a m c
- 6.  Quotes  for eek ending riday  revious o ate  shown. w F p t d

COMMERCIAL BANK CREDIT

(Percentage  hange;  seasonally justed  nnual ate) c ad a r 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  Includes  unicipal  ecurities, eign  overnment  securities,  porate  onds, quities,  d  trading  ccount ssets. m s for g cor b e an a a

- 4.  Includes  stimates  f onsumer  loans hat  ave  been  securitized   banks  and  are  still tstanding. e o c t h by ou

THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY

U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services

In  March, the deficit in  U.S. international trade in goods and services widened noticeably from a  revised February figure. Exports fell almost 1  percent relative to a  February level that was revised up significantly: most categories of  exports saw decreases. Imports rose 1-3/4 percent; the increase was due almost entirely to a  pickup in imports of gold and industrial supplies.

For the first quarter, the deficit (at an annual rate) was substantially larger than in  the fourth quarter and about the same as  in the third quarter of last year. Exports grew at a 5-1/2 percent annual rate, much slower than the pace set in recent quarters. Increases in service receipts and in agricultural and automotive products were about offset by  continued declines in exported industrial supplies and machinery (other than computers). In  contrast, imports grew at a 12 percent annual rate in  the first quarter, after declining in  the two previous quarters. Increases were recorded in  most trade categories with the exception of computers.

U.S. International Trade in Goods and  Services (in billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)

1/------------------------

<!-- missing-text -->

1/ U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the  Census and  Bureau of  Economic Analysis, BOP valuation.

*/ In billions of chained (1992) dollars.

Note: Details may  not add to  totals because of rounding.

TABLE 2

U.S. TRADE IN GOODS AND SERVICES: SUMMARY DETAILS (Millions of  dollars, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source:  U.S. Department of  Com.erce, monthly press release (FT-900).

Source:

U.S.

Department of  Commnerce,

monthly press

release

(FI-900).

TABLE 3

U.S. TRADE IN GOODS AND  SERVICES: SUMMARY OF MONTHS AND QUARTERS --DOLLAR CHANGES (Millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source: U.S. Department  of Commerce, monthly press release (FT-900).

TABLE 4

U.S. TRADE IN GOODS  AND SERVICES: SUMMARY OF MONTHS AND QUARTERS --PERCENT CHANGES (Percent change from previous period)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source:  U.S.  Department of Commerce,  monthly press  release  FT-900). (

Source:

U.S.

Department of

Commerce, monthly

press release

(FT-900).