Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Strictly nfidential  FR)  Class Co ( II FOMC

Part 1

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Summary and  Outlook

January  29,  1997

Strictly nfidential  FR) Class II  OMC Co ( F

January 29, 1997

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

_

___~__~_

_

__

__

Summary

The economy closed out 1996 on a  strong note. Our guess is that, on  Friday, the  Commerce Department will publish an  advance estimate of  fourth-quarter growth of real GDP around 3-1/2 percent; some private analysts are talking about even higher figures. In any case, we  find ourselves faced once again with the question of whether an  unexpected zig or zag is telling us something new about the  underlying trend in  activity.

Arguing against extrapolating the strength in  the fourth quarter is the fact that much of  the acceleration apparently was the result of  a  sudden burst of  exports--one that, given reasonable assessments of  underlying trends, most likely will be followed by only meager increases in  the near term. Indeed, the recent appreciation of  the  dollar will likely exert a  significant drag on our trade position in coming quarters. Consequently, we  anticipate that net exports will fall substantially through this year--more than in  our previous forecasts.

On  the other side, however, the prospects for domestic spending appear at least as  favorable as before. Households have experienced sizable gains in  employment and income of late, and corporate profitability is  high. Although bond yields have backed up further in recent weeks, credit conditions on  the  whole appear quite accommodative. Moreover, the striking further gains in  the stock market have left Americans wealthier than  we  anticipated they would be  at this point. Thus, we  have raised our projection of  the growth of  private domestic demand in  1997, offsetting the greater negative effect of  the external sector and keeping our forecast of  real GDP growth this year at 2-1/4 percent. However, given the upside surprise of  the fourth quarter, this means that the level of activity is consistently higher than before.

The  higher level carries through 1998. We  expect that our widening trade and current account deficit will contribute ultimately to a  reversal of  market sentiment and  will depress the dollar, thereby helping to  slow the growth in  the trade gap. Given this pattern, we  are now  projecting that GDP growth will remain slightly above trend next year, at a  tad more than 2  percent.

<!-- missing-text -->

The  upward revision to  activity is  mirrored in  higher projected levels of resource utilization. Labor markets, of course, are already tight, and  the latest statistics have confirmed the uptilt in compensation increases last year. With the unemployment rate projected to edge down to 5 percent and  with the  minimum wage jumping again later this year, we  see labor cost inflation continuing to  escalate. In addition, after a period in  which declining prices for non-oil imports have damped inflation, this influence is likely to reverse by  next year. More favorable movements in food and energy prices should restrain increases in  the overall CPI, but we  foresee core CPI inflation increasing from 2.6 percent during 1996 to  3.2 percent during 1998--an acceleration that would be a  couple of tenths larger were it  not for the effects of  technical changes to  the index over this period.

Key  Background Factors in  the Forecast

With this month's revisions, our forecast has edged further in the  direction of  a  more cyclical pattern of  inflationary overshooting, which typically has been followed by  monetary tightening and then a  period of  weakness. Though our forecast is still well short of  that scenario, we  remain concerned that the greater risks may lie on that side.

However, financial market participants seem little afflicted with such concerns. The prevailing view is  that, at  worst, only the slightest tap on the monetary brakes will be  necessary to keep inflation in check in a  context of  steady, moderate growth. Over

the intermeeting period, longer-term interest rates have moved up another 1/4 percentage point in response to the surprising strength of  the economy, but the yield curve is only a  little steeper than "normal."

As at  the time of  the last Greenbook, we  think the bond  markets may  benefit somewhat from developments in  the fiscal sphere. But over the coming year, as inflationary pressures mount, markets should come increasingly to anticipate a  tightening of  monetary policy. On  balance, we  see no  reason to predict any large, persistent deviations of  bond yields from  their current levels--and therefore rates in  this forecast are notably higher than in  the last, especially in 1998.

The recent rise in  bond yields has had no perceptible effect on the stock market. The sustained stream of positive news on  growth, inflation, and earnings has reinforced the optimism of equity investors and helped to extend the  market rally. The 4  percent to 8  percent rise in stock prices since the last FOMC meeting has surprised us  yet again, and we  are loath to predict a  meaningful setback without a  turn in  monetary policy--which is  absent from  this forecast, based as it is on  a  stable federal funds rate. We estimate that corporate profits came in stronger in  the fourth quarter than we  had  projected and that earnings "momentum" will remain reasonably favorable in  the near term. We  now expect that stock prices will rise a  bit further this year before running out of steam as  flattening profits undermine optimistic share valuations.

The trade-weighted exchange value of  the dollar, which has risen 4-3/4 percent further against the other G-10 currencies since the last FOMC meeting, has been boosted by  market participants who see  more signs of  weakness in  economic activity in a  number of countries abroad than we  do. Though we  have assumed that these forces will persist for a  while, we  also believe that market participants will, over time, be  swayed by  the growing U.S. trade and current account deficits. We  expect that the dollar, after holding around its current level into the second half of  this year, will retrace its recent run-up, depreciating about 5  percent by  the end of  1998. Our projection for foreign economic activity is unchanged; we  still expect real growth abroad to  average just under 4  percent this year and next, up from 3-1/2 percent during 1996.

In recent weeks, the spot price of  West Texas intermediate crude oil has declined less than  we  had anticipated, and  we  now

expect it to average $24 per barrel this quarter, $3 higher than we projected in  December. World supplies have remained tight, in  part because demand has been boosted by severe weather in  Europe.

Pressures on  supplies should ease gradually by the spring, however, and the spot price is expected to  stabilize at $20 per barrel--just a  shade higher than previously assumed.

Regarding fiscal policy, we  are projecting that the unified federal deficit for fiscal year 1997, $109 billion, will  be little changed from  the $107 billion recorded in  fiscal 1996. Beyond that, we  still anticipate that the Administration and the  Congress will agree on  a  program promising budgetary balance by fiscal 2002. The package will probably contain a  number of "gimmicks"--such as unspecified spending cuts and asset sales--but we  are assuming that the  plan will be credible enough to  give a  little further lift to the bond markets. For fiscal 1998, we  have incorporated deficitreduction measures totaling about $20 billion, enough to  hold the unified deficit to $117 billion despite the slowdown in  economic growth.

<!-- missing-text -->

Recent Developments and Prospects for the Current Quarter

Our forecast of  a  deceleration of  real GDP from  a  growth rate of 3-1/2 percent last quarter to 1-3/4 percent this quarter rests almost entirely on  analytical deduction. We  have no  hard economic data for January--other than the weekly unemployment insurance figures, which are  notoriously unreliable at  this time of  year.

Even some potentially important December indicators, notably figures on international trade and inventories, have yet to come in.

The key features of  our current-quarter forecast can be summarized briefly. As  noted above, the  most important factor in the projected downswing in  growth is the behavior of  net exports. We estimate that this component added about 1-3/4 percentage points to  GDP growth in  the fourth quarter and  will subtract about 1-1/4 percentage points in  the first. Some part of  this swing is attributable to  the residual seasonality in  the data; other important considerations are the apparent bunching of  some lumpy exports, the effects of  the auto strikes, and an assessment of underlying trends.

Meanwhile, we are looking for a  step-up in  the growth of domestic purchases, from a  1-3/4 percent pace in  the fourth quarter to a  3  percent rate in  the current period. With federal purchases likely to  be  dropping sharply (because of  a  decline in  military deliveries), private demand more than accounts for the projected gain.

Strong income, increased wealth, and upbeat sentiment should propel real consumer spending to another hefty advance. We  expect the spending increase to be  broadly based. Automakers are sweetening price incentives to  ensure that their sales regain some of  the ground lost last quarter when  the strike and then  production problems constrained supplies. In addition, sales of  personal computers to  households may rise with the arrival on the  market of the  new  MMX-chip machines.

We  are also projecting greater growth of  business investment. For producers' durable equipment, the additional strength is expected to  be  in  the high-tech areas. The sharp upswing in computer shipments in  December supports the industry's view  that the slippage in  October-November was transitory. On  the structures side, we  have revised up our estimate of  expenditures, although outlays are likely to  be subdued after the huge increase in construction last fall. Finally, business inventory investment may rise a  little with the rebuilding of  auto dealers' stocks.

Although we  think the demand for new  homes is stabilizing, the fourth-quarter falloff in  housing starts and permits suggests that residential investment will decline appreciably this quarter. Building in  December appears to  have been depressed by  heavy

precipitation; the flooding in  the West and the freeze in  the Midwest this month have probably delayed the  makeup.

Net hiring is expected to slow somewhat this quarter--but much less so  than growth of  real GDP. The  data on  initial claims for unemployment insurance, the reports of  hiring plans, and  households' perceptions of  conditions in the labor market suggest that labor demand is holding up quite well; in light of  the reported difficulty in finding well-qualified workers, firms may  hesitate to trim payrolls. Although the recent spurt in  labor force participation could be  extended, we  think a brief pause is  more likely and have allowed the momentum of  hiring to  show through in a  slightly lower jobless rate.

<!-- missing-text -->

Regarding inflation, rapidly rising energy prices last quarter pushed up  the overall CPI. With the  persistence of  higher crude oil costs early this year, we expect another inflationary impulse from energy in  the current quarter. Large increases in retail food prices also added to  average CPI inflation last quarter; but prices at the crude level decelerated in  December and, despite the recent freeze in  Florida, continue, on  balance, to  be reasonably favorable. This suggests that consumer food prices will rise only moderately in the current quarter. At  the core level, we see some risk that the higher costs of  oil-related inputs and increased compensation rates could lead to a  step-up in inflation in  the near term. However, goods markets are showing no sign of imminent price acceleration, in part because of  competition from imports, and we  expect the core CPI to  continue increasing only a  couple of  tenths a month this quarter.

The Outlook for  the Economy beyond the Current Quarter

Growth of real GDP is now  projected to average almost 2-1/2 percent during the latter three quarters of 1997 and then to be  just over 2  percent during 1998--a growth path that, on  net, is a bit  higher than  that in  the December Greenbook. This trajectory is expected to result in  a  reduction of the  unemployment rate to 5 percent by 1998. At  the same time, the rate of  manufacturing capacity utilization is anticipated to remain slightly above its longer-run average. Thus, in  this forecast, both labor and industrial markets are expected to be  on  the tight side for the  next two  years, and we  have allowed those pressures on  resources to show through in a bit  more of  an  upward tilt in inflation.

Consumer spending. Although consumer spending picked back  up in  the fourth quarter, the personal saving rate appears to have continued its upward drift. Future revisions of  the NIPA could alter the picture considerably, but any revision would need to  be very sizable to  put  the saving rate on  the low  trajectory that one might have expected in  light of  the enormous increase in stock market wealth.

Demographic and other factors could well be  contributing to a tendency for higher saving; nevertheless, if  this is the case, we still are puzzled why  that tendency has become readily apparent only in  the past two  years. Perhaps the more public discussion of  the strains in  federal entitlement programs has played a  role, and financial firms have done their best to  drum up business by heightening concerns about the  adequacy of  saving for retirement more generally. In  any event, the sensational returns in  the stock market undoubtedly have provided those worried about their future financial needs an  added incentive to act. Moreover, those households whose stock portfolios are  held in  retirement accounts may  be  less likely to cash in  their chips and go shopping because of the  tax penalties that they would face.

At  the same time, we  continue to  find evidence, most recently in  our 1995 Survey of  Consumer Finances, to suggest that debt burdens may  have been constraining spending. Between 1992 and 1995, the rise in  debt burdens was greatest among lower-income households who tended to hold relatively few financial assets. These households are the ones who  might have felt the  pinch more recently when credit card issuers began to restrain new  lines of  credit.

Nonetheless, the influence of  the debt factor on spending has probably been quite mild in  the aggregate.

Our earlier forecast assumed a  near-term correction in  the stock market that implied a  noticeable decline in  the wealth-toincome ratio in  1997. That assumption had the effect of  tempering the upside risk that consumer demand might take off as a  consequence of advances in  net worth. However, with our  current projection of stock prices, the wealth-to-income ratio stays high until 1998 and then  turns down only mildly. Moreover, better employment and income prospects, which are likely to  keep consumer confidence high, suggest greater support for consumer demand.

Thus, in  this forecast, real consumption expenditures are projected to grow slightly faster than real disposable income over the  next two years, tilting the saving rate downward. Real PCE increases 3-1/4 percent during 1997 and 2-1/4 percent during 1998. Arguably, our projection still may not fully capture the upside potential for demand associated with  the current wealth position of households.

Residential investment. The recent large month-to-month fluctuations in  single-family starts during the fourth quarter have obscured the  underlying direction of  building. But permits, the generally more reliable series, have fluctuated little since September. Meanwhile, other market indicators have been  mixed of late. On  balance, we  are left with the impression that demand for housing stabilized toward the end of 1996, leaving the  bulk of  the downturn in  single-family starts behind us.

Looking ahead, we  are projecting just a  gradual further decline in  new  homebuilding over the forecast period; growth of  jobs, income, and  wealth moderate, but mortgage rates are expected to remain close to  recent levels, thereby maintaining relatively favorable cash-flow affordability of  home ownership. Starts, which totaled 1.09 million units (annual rate) in  the fourth quarter of 1996, drift down to 1.08 million units this spring and 1.06 million units in 1998.

We  are also projecting a  mild decline in  multifamily starts, from 310,000 in  1996 to 280,000 in 1998. Although in-migration is creating strong demand in some locales and the supply of financing is still ample, this market's broader supply-demand balance does not provide strong incentives for construction. In  fact, in some parts of  the country, manufactured homes, rather than apartments, have

been growing in  importance as the alternative to  traditional singlefamily residences.

Business fixed investment. At  the end of  1996, the fundamental forces shaping the environment for business investment-the user cost of  capital goods, internal cash flow, and the output accelerator--were still positive. Moving into the projection period, these influences lose some thrust as flattening profits restrain increases in  cash flow and as production and sales decelerate. As  a  result, growth of  real business fixed investment declines from about 8-3/4 percent during 1996 to  6-1/4 percent in 1997 and 1998.

We  expect slower spending for equipment to account for this deceleration, although several factors should keep equipment outlays rising at  a  moderate pace. Most important, declines in  the prices of  computers, while likely to be  less steep than in 1996 (when the cost of  memory chips collapsed), should still suffice to  maintain growth in  real outlays for computers at 20 percent or  more. In addition, advances in cellular technology and expanding business uses of  satellites should spur rapid growth in spending on telecommunications equipment. Finally, shipments of  commercial aircraft to  U.S. carriers should trend up as  Boeing steps up production to fill orders out of  its massive backlog.

For the first time in quite a  while, the indicators for nonresidential investment appear relatively consistent, and  we are now  more confident that a  forecast showing a  moderate further expansion in  this sector is reasonable. Revised data on construction contracts now  show a  clear uptrend in 1996. Moreover, the areas of relative strength in  the contracts figures seem to  line up  well with reports that suburban and downtown commercial areas are experiencing low  vacancy rates and that demand for new  hotels has been strong. Real outlays are  projected to rise 5  percent during 1997 and 3-1/2 percent during 1998. We  sense only hints of speculative fever creeping into this sector; but considering the sector's past proclivities toward excess, the enthusiasm of  the stock market recently for the shares of  REITs, and the availability of  financing from other sources, one might be concerned about the potential for a  more dynamic upswing in  nonresidential building.

Inventory investment. We  estimate that nonfarm inventory accumulation amounted to about $28 billion (annual rate) in  the fourth quarter, and we  see investment remaining close to  that pace

on average over the projection period. This would keep aggregate inventory-sales ratios in  the recent low  range.

Within the nonfarm sector, motor vehicle dealers entered the year with lower stocks of  many models than they would have liked. Manufacturers plan a  step-up in production this quarter that should begin to  restore the desired balance, but our forecast of  sales points to  an  ongoing, modest need for accumulation into the summer. Apart from motor vehicles, stocks appear to  have remained in reasonably good alignment with sales through last fall. However, the current rate of accumulation, appropriate when sales are rising so rapidly, will have to  be trimmed somewhat in  coming quarters as sales moderate.

In  the  farm sector, inventories shrank a  bit last year but should increase somewhat this year and next--if, as  we  assume, crops are normal. However, the rebuilding of cattle inventories after last year's decline is  expected to  take considerably longer, extending into 1998 and  beyond.

Government. After the spending for defense procurement returns to  a  more normal level this quarter, overall federal outlays for consumption and gross investment are projected to fall at an  average rate of  about 1  percent over the remainder of  the calendar year. The decline in federal purchases is larger--4 percent--during 1998, when the  initial installment of  our assumed new round of  budgetcutting efforts should begin to affect both defense and  nondefense purchases.

Spending by  state and local governments is projected to continue to rise at a  moderate, 2-1/2 percent, pace over the forecast period. States are in reasonably good fiscal shape, and given our economic outlook, revenues should be  growing at a  healthy rate. However, these jurisdictions are remaining conservative in their plans for spending, preferring to  keep voters happy by  holding down taxes.

Net exports of goods and services. Because of  the new path for the  dollar, we  now  expect that exports will grow a  bit more slowly for the rest of  this year than  they did in 1996 and  that imports will accelerate further. All  told, the decline in  net exports during the final three quarters of  1997 shaves, on  average, 1/2 percentage point (annual rate) from  the growth of  real GDP over the period. By 1998, this drag on  domestic production from  the external sector is  expected to  be stemmed by  the lower dollar.

Export growth picks up a  bit, returning to  its 1996 pace, whereas import growth slows considerably. (A more detailed discussion of the prospects for net exports is contained in  the International Developments section.)

Labor markets. As  has been  the case for some time, a  key factor shaping the outlook for job  market conditions and labor costs is the path for labor productivity. Measured productivity in  the nonfarm business sector was reported to have been little changed during 1994 and 1995. Although we  estimate that its growth picked up to 0.8 percent last year, its performance was still disappointing relative to  our longstanding assumption that the underlying trend during the current expansion had remained at  the 1.1 percent pace that prevailed during the 1980s. Taking cyclical influences into consideration as best we  can, the current figures seem to indicate that the  underlying trend in  labor productivity in the 1990s has slowed noticeably, perhaps to around 3/4 percent per  year. If  we were to adopt that view, we  would need to project a much tighter and more inflationary labor market than we  have heretofore.

However, a  somewhat more moderate response to the incoming data seems appropriate for a  variety of  reasons. We  have difficulty accepting the notion that economic efficiency has performed so poorly when businesses have been restructuring, capital-labor ratios have been rising, and profitability has been well maintained. Notably, in the nonfinancial corporate sector, the reported performance of  labor productivity in recent years looks markedly better than in  the nonfarm business sector as  a  whole. The  trend in productivity in  the nonfinancial corporate sector has been stable since the early 1970s, which suggests that problems in output measurement outside the corporate sector could well  be distorting the nonfarm business data. More generally, in recent years, the stronger estimated growth of gross domestic income--from which nonfinancial corporate output is  derived--relative to gross domestic product--from which nonfarm business output is derived--could point to an  upward revision to the latter series.

Certainly, revisions will be  made to  both sides of  the  ledger this summer when the Commerce Department incorporates more up-todate source data on  expenditures and income flows. We  are reluctant to anticipate that the adjustment on  the  product side will be so large that it  would erase all of the apparent deceleration in nonfarm business productivity in recent years. But we  are persuaded

by  the economic arguments that output will be  revised up to  some extent over the 1994-96 period. As a middle ground, we  have assumed that the revision will suffice to  move the productivity trend for the 1990s up  toward 0.9 percent per year, and this is the trend rate of growth that we  have carried forward in  the current projection. Of  course, if  our guess is correct, the upcoming NIPA revisions will still leave a  gap between gross income and gross output; in the forecast, we  have leaned in the direction of  having that gap diminish over time, letting measured expenditures rise somewhat faster than income and narrowing the statistical discrepancy over the forecast period.

Our forecast has productivity growing just below trend over the next two years and the unemployment rate declining further. Payroll employment is projected to grow  around 1-3/4 percent this year and close to 1-1/2 percent next year--a deceleration from last year's 2-1/4 percent pace; the growth of  household employment is only a  bit less. Job opportunities are likely to look sufficiently good to continue boosting labor force participation, and welfare reform may reinforce that tendency. We  expect the participation rate to  move up another 0.3 percentage point during the next two  years. On balance, the unemployment rate is projected to  decline to 5.1 percent by  the end of  this year and then to 5.0 percent in 1998.

<!-- missing-text -->

Wages and prices. The  upturn in  the employment cost index for private industry compensation, from 2.6 percent in 1995 to 3.1 percent in 1996, confirms that labor markets have become sufficiently tight to generate ongoing upward pressure on  labor

costs. Although businesses profited from another year of  slowly rising benefit costs in  1996, the combination of  strong labor demand and a hike in  the minimum wage pushed wages and salaries up  almost 3-1/2 percent, a  sharp acceleration from the 2-3/4 percent pace that prevailed during the preceding four years. By  our estimates, the direct effect of  the minimum wage probably represented at  most only 0.2 percentage point of  the pickup in  wages and about 0.1 percentage point of  the acceleration in  the overall ECI.

We  are projecting a  further acceleration in  ECI compensation, to  3-1/2 percent this year and 3-3/4 percent in 1998. To some extent, the bigger compensation increases in  1997 will mirror the larger increase in  consumer prices over the past year, but they will also reflect the greater tightness of  the labor market. Wages also will be  boosted a bit in 1997 and 1998 by  the next increment to  the federal minimum.

Although we anticipate faster growth in  benefit costs in 1997 and 1998 than in  the past two years, we still expect that those increases will be smaller than the rise in  wages. Surveys and anecdotal reports seem  to confirm the quarterly pattern of  ECI readings, which showed that the deceleration in  health insurance costs ended last year. These sources also point to  a  step-up in premiums this year and possibly much larger increases in 1998 than we  have forecast. The stories that insurers and providers are trying to rebuild profit margins seem plausible, particularly when viewed against a backdrop of  demands for enhanced quality of service. However, at  this juncture, we  suspect that some of  the more dramatic predictions of  premium increases are overblown. Moreover, employers may still have some scope to  make changes in coverage and to  move workers to lower-cost plans. Nevertheless, if benefit costs were to  accelerate rapidly, the increases could pose an  upside risk to our overall compensation forecast because the tradeoff of  benefit changes against wages is  not tight in  the short run.

With labor costs moving up  a  bit more rapidly in  this forecast, we  have raised our projection for core inflation. Moreover, the anticipated swing in  non-oil import prices is  more pronounced than before and leaves a  greater imprint on the inflation forecast. We project that, after dropping 3  percent last year, non-oil import prices will fall 1  percent this year and  then increase 2 percent in 1998--a swing large enough to  make a  significant contribution to

the  acceleration in  core consumer prices over the period. All told, the officially reported core CPI, which rose 2.6 percent during 1996, is projected to  be  2.8 percent during 1997 and 3.2 percent during 1998. As we  noted earlier, that acceleration is smaller than it would have been in  the absence of  scheduled technical changes to the core CPI; we estimate that, without those changes, the index would show an additional 0.2 percentage point acceleration between 1996 and 1998 and that in 1998 a  comparably measured core CPI would be rising at  its fastest pace since 1991.

<!-- missing-text -->

As  in  our previous forecast, the overall CPI inflation outlook is  more favorable than that for the core CPI because the recent sharp run-up in  energy prices begins to reverse this spring. We project that, after rising at  a  14-1/4 percent rate in  the current quarter, the CPI for energy will drop at a  rate of 4 to 5  percent for two quarters before leveling off. Clearly, the possibility that higher energy costs could persist beyond the winter poses an  upside risk  to  our current forecast. Any additional unusual needs for heating oil production would further delay the building of stocks of

gasoline and cause price pressures in  that market segment this spring. We  also continue to assume that harvests in  this year and next will be  ample enough to prevent a  resurfacing of  upward pressure on  crop prices; thus, food prices are forecast to rise at rates just a  shade below core inflation--2-1/2 percent during 1997 and just under 3  percent during 1998.

The overall CPI inflation, which averaged 3.1 percent during 1996, is projected to ease to 2.6 percent this year and then to increase to  3.0 percent during 1998. The chain-weighted price index for gross domestic product, which excludes the direct effect of changes in  the cost of  imports, is  projected to accelerate from an estimated 2-1/4 percent in 1996 to about 2-3/4 percent in  both 1997 and 1998.

Financial Markets

Our impression is  that investors and lenders are operating increasingly on  the basis of rosy projections and seeking less compensation for risk. This behavior is not entirely surprising after several years of  cyclical improvement in  the economy. Memories of  past troubles tend to  fade, and in  the present case the optimism about the  future has been enhanced by a  perception among many investors that changes in  the structure of  the  U.S. economy have  made it  inherently more stable. In addition, the perceived success of  the Federal Reserve in  fostering noninflationary growth appears to  have enhanced confidence that it  will be  able to keep things on  track should something untoward begin to  develop.

Our baseline economic scenario for the next couple of  years suggests that the day of  reckoning may not be  close at  hand for those who have been incautious in  their fund management. The mounting of  inflationary pressures could lead to  a  greater souring of  bond market sentiment by  next year than we  have anticipated, but that risk would seem limited in light of  the fact that we  are forecasting that headline CPI inflation will be running at 3  percent or less. As  we've noted, flagging profit gains may  undermine the rosy expectations underlying current stock market valuations, but we do  not foresee--in an environment of  stable short-term rates--a "correction" of  such a  magnitude that it  will scare investors into a wholesale flight to  the exits. If  such a  circumstance were to occur, it  might, among other things, prompt some reflows into M2 assets. Without that development, and with little change predicted

for interest rates, we expect that growth in  M2 will tend to track nominal GDP.

Credit is likely to remain readily available to  businesses, on attractive terms. The less robust profitability of  the business sector may  make lenders hesitant about reducing risk premiums still further; however, the macro environment looks favorable enough that we  cannot assign a  high probability to the kind of shock that would cause a  significant tightening of  terms or standards in  the loan or securities markets. The requirements of  nonfinancial corporations for external finance will probably expand as  capital expenditures rise relative to cash flow. However, the projected financing gap is moderate by  historical standards; in the aggregate, the ongoing net retirement of equity shares--in connection with corporate acquisitions and share repurchase programs--will continue to account for a  large proportion of  the business sector's borrowing activity. Banks are likely to provide a healthy share of the credit that businesses need for  M&amp;A  or capital expenditures, but the  bond market is projected to  remain the more important source of  debt financing, either directly or  indirectly through the securitization of  loans.

In  the  household sector, consumer debt growth is projected to moderate to 5-1/2 percent per year in  1997-98, from the 6-1/2 percent pace of late 1996. This slowing is a bit less than that in  the last forecast, partly because of  our reassessment of borrowing propensities in  light of  upward revisions to figures for the latter half of  1996 and partly in  reflection of  the greater projected strength of  spending. Consumer loan delinquencies, especially in the credit card area, are likely to remain high enough to dissuade banks from resuming their earlier, more aggressive marketing and underwriting practices, but credit should continue to be  readily available to  the vast majority of  households. In  the mortgage market, debt growth may  continue to  be enhanced by  the promotion of  home equity loans; however, given the slackening in home construction and sales, overall home mortgage credit flows are projected to  be in  the same range as that experienced in recent quarters.

Net borrowing by  states and localities appears to  have moved back into positive territory. Debt retirements are waning with  the completion of  advance refundings of  higher cost issues from  the  mid-

1980s, but they are not disappearing. Consequently, we  see taxexempt debt increasing only 2  to 2-1/2 percent a  year during 1997 and 1998.

In  total, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow about 5  percent this year and next, a  little less than it grew in 1996 and a  little above the pace of  nominal GDP expansion. With depositories accounting for about the same share of overall credit flows, and further increasing their reliance on sources of  funds in  M3, we  expect that M3  will continue to grow at  a somewhat faster pace than M2.

Alternative Simulations

Our alternative simulations present the consequences of different assumptions about the  federal funds rate. In  the first simulation, increases in  the funds rate begin immediately, and cumulate to 100 basis points by  the end of  this year. The higher level is  maintained throughout 1998. Under this scenario, growth of real GDP this year is 0.4 percentage point less than in  the baseline forecast, and during 1998 it is 0.8 percentage point lower than the baseline. The unemployment rate at the end of 1998 is 1/2 percentage point higher than in the baseline forecast. Given the additional slack, CPI inflation in  the alternative simulation is fractionally lower during 1997 and 1/2 percentage point lower during 1998 than in  the baseline forecast.

<!-- missing-text -->

The second simulation assumes that the funds rate is lowered 100 basis points over the course of  this year and then held steady during 1998. The economic effects of  this alternative are symmetric to  the alternative in  which the funds rate was raised.

Strictly  nfidential Co &lt;FR&gt; Class II  FOMC

STAFF PROJECTIONS OF CHANGES IN  GDP, PRICES, AND UNEMPLOYMENT (Percent,  annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. For all urban  consumers.
- 2. Level, except as  noted.
- 3. Percent hange from two quarters  arlier; r  unemployment rate,  hange in  percentage oints. c e fo c p
- 4. Percent hange from four  quarters  arlier; c e for  unemployment rate,  hange in  percentage oints. c p

Strictly  nfidential  FR&gt; Co &lt; Class  II FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

- i. Changes are  from  fourth quarter to  fourth uarter. q
- 2. Private-industry  kers wor

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Private-industry  kers. wor

Strictly  nfidential  R&gt; Co &lt;F Class  II  FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

Strictly  onfidential  FR&gt; C &lt; Class II FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

Components may  not  sum  to  total due to  rounding.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. OMB's July 1996 deficit estimates (assuming the enactment of the  President's proposals) are  $126 billion in FY97 and $94 billion in FY98. CBO's January 1997 baseline deficit estimates are $124 billion in FY97 and $120 billion in FY98. Budget receipts, outlays, and surplus/deficit include corresponding Social Security (OASDI) categories. The OASDI surplus is excluded from  the on-budget deficit and shown separately as off-budget, as classified under current law. The Postal Service deficit is included in  off-budget outlays beginning in FY90.
- 2. OMB's July 1996 deficit estimates (assuming the enactment of the  President's proposals), excluding deposit insurance spending, are $134 billion in FY97 and $96 billion in FY98. CBO'S January 1997 baseline deficit estimates, excluding deposit insurance, are $136 billion in FY97 and $124 billion in FY98.
- 3. Other means of financing are  checks issued less checks paid, accrued items, and changes in  other financial assets and liabilities.
- 4. HEB is  the NIPA current and  capital account surplus in  current dollars, with cyclically sensitive receipts and outlays adjusted to  the level of  potential output generated by  1.8 percent real growth and  an associated unemployment rate of  6  percent. Quarterly figures for  change in HEB and FI are not at  annual rates. Change in  HEB, as  a  percent of nominal potential GDP, is reversed in sign. FI is the weighted difference of  discretionary changes in federal spending and  taxes (in  chained (1992) dollars), scaled by  real federal consumption plus investment. For change in  HEB and FI, negative values indicate restraint.
- 5. Fiscal 1995 data for the  unified budget come from OMB, fiscal 1996 and  quarterly data come from the  Monthly Treasury Statement and may  not sum  to OMB fiscal year totals.

a--Actual.

b--Preliminary.

Confidential

FR Class I I

CHANGE

IN DEBT

OF THE  DOMESTIC

NONFINANCIAL

SECTORS1

January  29,  1997

(Percent)

<!-- missing-text -->

Federal  ebt ises  percent  n d r 3.8 i 1996, .2 3 percent  n i 1997, and  4.0 ercent p in 1998.

Nonfederal  ebt ncreases  percent  n d i 5.8 i 1996, .5 5 percent  n i 1997, and  5.5 ercent p in 1998.

Confidential  R  Class II F January  29,  1997

FLOW OF  FUNDS PROJECTIONS: HIGHLIGHTS (Billions  f ollars) o d

1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  For orporations:  ess f  apital  penditures  er  U.S. nternal ds. c Exc o c ex ov i fun
- 3. Average  debt  evels  he eriod  computed  s he veragt  f  eriod-end bt ositions)  ided  nominal l int p ( a t a o p de p div by GDP.
- 4. NIPA surplus ss  hanges n etirement  nd ssets us  onsumption  ffixed pital. le c i r fu a pl c o ca

Recent Developments

Since the December FOMC meeting, the weighted-average foreign exchange value of  the dollar has appreciated 4-3/4 percent in  terms of  the currencies of  the other G-10 countries. The rise in the value of  the dollar appears to reflect market perceptions of surprisingly strong growth in  the United States and a  risk of faltering growth in some other countries.

The dollar has risen 5-3/4 percent against the mark and most other ERM  currencies over the intermeeting period. Data releases on employment and business sentiment in  Germany and on  manufacturing output and  household spending in  France disappointed market participants and contributed to downward pressure on those countries' currencies. Against the Japanese yen, the dollar has risen 6-3/4 percent. Recent Japanese data have suggested an improvement in economic activity in  the fourth quarter from a nearly-flat third quarter, but the budget announced for the fiscal year beginning in  April is  more contractionary than anticipated. In addition, the sharp declines in  Japanese stock prices (10 percent on the Topix since the December Greenbook) and the associated problems of Japanese banks have raised questions about the prospects for private spending, particularly investment. In  contrast to  most other G-10 countries, Canadian economic indicators have been more positive than expected, and the U.S. dollar has depreciated 1-1/2 percent in  terms of  the Canadian dollar.

The shifts in sentiment about the economic outlook in the United States and abroad have been reflected as well in the movements of long-term interest rates since the December FOMC meeting. After rising briefly in  early January, rates on  ten-year government securities abroad have moved down, on  balance declining an  average of 5 basis points. With the comparable U.S. rate rising 25 basis points, the interest differential has  moved in  favor of the dollar, consistent with the observed changes in exchange rates. Foreign short-term market rates of  interest changed little over the period.

The dollar has depreciated 3/4 percent in  nominal terms against the Mexican peso since the December meeting. In  midJanuary, Mexico repaid ahead of schedule the final $3.5 billion of outstanding obligations to the U.S. Treasury and $1.5 billion to  the

IMF;  these funds were  borrowed during the 1994-95  financial  crisis. Over the intermeeting period, Mexican short-term interest  rates have declined nearly 5-1/2 percentage points.

The Desk did not  intervene.

Recent data suggest that during the fourth quarter the  rate of real  output growth in the  continental European countries slowed, whereas  it  improved in Japan and  remained healthy in the United Kingdom and Canada. In October and November, German industrial production averaged a little  less than the third-quarter level,  and unemployment continued to rise through December. However, new orders for manufactured goods  remained at their previous high level in October/November. In contrast, in Japan industrial production in the  fourth quarter and housing starts and machinery orders  in October/November all  improved noticeably. The  ratio of job  offers to  applicants  increased in both October and November from the thirdquarter average. In Canada,  retail sales  rose  sharply in October and November, and employment expanded further through December.

Consumer  price inflation  remains  low  or continues  to  slow in the major industrial countries. Most  strikingly, in  Italy it has improved  to about  2-1/2  percent.

The nominal U.S. trade balance on  goods and  services improved considerably in October and remained about unchanged in November. For October  and November combined, the trade deficit narrowed to about the  same annual rate  as  in the  first  quarter of  1996. Exports of  goods and services were about 5 percent higher than  in the third quarter:  exports of machinery and industrial supplies moved to record  levels. On average,  imports of goods  and services  in October and November were only slightly higher at an annual rate  than in the third quarter. Reduced  imports  of automotive products from Canada (due to  the GM strike) nearly offset increases in a wide range  of other trade categories. After rising 2 percent during the third quarter, the  quantity of oil imported fell  10.5  percent on average during October/November.  Weaker consumption and normal  seasonal stock drawdowns accounted for the lower oil imports, but preliminary statistics  for December from the Department of Energy suggest some rebound.

Prices of nonagricultural exports moved up a  bit, whereas prices of  agricultural exports continued to  decline. Prices of nonoil imports decreased slightly, on  balance, in  the fourth quarter, continuing a  downward trend that began in late 1995.

The price of imported oil jumped 7  percent in October and remained at about that higher level through year-end; it rose 37 percent in the twelve months through December. Skirmishes in the Kurdish region of  Northern Iraq, strikes in  France that have interrupted refinery operations, and concern about the level of heating oil stocks because of  extremely cold weather in  Europe helped push up spot WTI prices in  December. Deliveries of  oil from Iraq put downward pressure on  prices during January, offsetting the effect of  the cold winter. The price of  spot WTI remains quite volatile and is varying in  the $23-$25 per barrel range.

<!-- missing-text -->

Outlook

The staff projects that total output in our  major foreign trading partners (weighted by  shares in  U.S. nonagricultural exports) will grow at an  annual rate of  nearly 4  percent over the forecast period. The dollar is projected to remain around recent elevated levels in  the near term but then to  decline. After rising sharply in  the fourth quarter of  1996, real exports of goods and services are projected to expand only slightly in  the current quarter and then to resume moderate growth. Real imports, which will be  supported by  steady growth in  U.S. real GDP and boosted in the near term  by  recent dollar appreciation, are projected to grow more rapidly than exports this year and at about the same rate as

exports next year. As  a  consequence, net exports should make a negative contribution to real GDP growth of  about 3/4 percentage point this year and about 1/4 percentage point next year.

The Dollar. We  project that the foreign exchange value of  the dollar in terms of  the other G-10 currencies will remain essentially unchanged at  its recent level through most of 1997, although in light of recent trends it could well move higher. The dollar eventually will weaken as  market participants become aware of  and concerned about widening U.S. and  Japanese current account imbalances. For 1997 the specific path is above that in the previous Greenbook, but by  the end of  1998 it is slightly below the endpoint projected in  December. We  expect that the CPI-adjusted value of  the dollar in  terms of the currencies of  key  developing countries will depreciate at  a  moderate rate throughout the forecast period.

Foreign G-7 countries. The staff forecasts that during 1997-98 real GDP in  the foreign G-7 countries will grow on  average at  an annual rate of  about 2-3/4 percent, unchanged from the previous Greenbook; small revisions to  the outlooks for individual countries are offsetting. Real output growth in  Germany is projected to  remain weak  through the current quarter, but to  rebound later in  the year as  the expansion, which has so  far been largely export-led, relies primarily on  growth of  domestic demand. In France, economic activity is expected to recover somewhat in  the current quarter from an estimated decline in  the fourth quarter of 1996 and to  accelerate further later this year as investment strengthens. In  both countries, fiscal restraint is planned for this year in  order to lower the government deficit as a  percent of GDP and to achieve the 3  percent reference value of  the Maastricht Treaty. We  have revised down our prediction for growth in Italy--to about 1  percent this year and 1-1/2 percent next year--as substantial additional fiscal restraint holds down growth in consumption and as recent appreciation of the lira in  terms of other ERM  currencies limits export growth.

Japanese real GDP is projected to  grow a  little less than 2 percent during 1997 and about 2-1/4 percent in 1998, a  bit weaker overall than in our December forecast. The effects of significant fiscal contraction announced for this year should be  partially offset by  stronger net exports, given the recent further depreciation of  the yen. For Canada, real GDP growth has been

revised up  to nearly 3-1/2 percent this year and 3-1/4 percent next year. Strength in consumption and private investment should continue through the forecast period; net exports should be about neutral. On  average, consumer price inflation in  the foreign G-7 countries is projected to  remain low over the forecast period.

Our forecast incorporates the assumption of some upward adjustment of  short-term market interest rates in  the major foreign industrial countries by  the end of  the forecast period. In  the near term, rates are assumed to change little except in Italy, where they are likely to  move down further. Subsequently, the continued expansion of  economic activity abroad should result in increases averaging about 1/2 percentage point. Long-term interest rates abroad are expected to remain about flat.

Other countries. Real GDP in our major trading partners in Latin America is expected to expand on average about 4-1/2 percent in 1997 and a  little less in 1998. We expect that in  Mexico the strong growth experienced during 1996 will continue this year, returning real GDP to its pre-crisis level by  early 1997. While our growth forecast for  Mexico is unchanged from the December Greenbook, we now  project somewhat greater real appreciation of  the peso which, in  combination with the recovery in  domestic demand, is projected to reduce significantly the trade surplus during 1997. Higher oil prices have continued to  moderate the decline in real GDP in Venezuela during 1996 and have led us to raise our projection for growth in 1997 1  percentage point, to  4-1/2 percent; growth should slow in 1998 as oil prices decline from their recent peak. Our forecast for growth in  Chile has been lowered 1  percentage point, to 5  percent; the slowdown is attributable in part to a  tightening of monetary conditions and  to the decline in copper prices.

Real output in  our  major trading partners in  Asia is expected to expand at an  annual rate of 7  percent in 1997 and 1998, slightly faster than in  the previous Greenbook. Forecasts for growth in China, Hong Kong, and  the Philippines have been raised because of stronger-than-anticipated activity toward the end of 1996 that is expected to continue into 1997. For South Korea, the forecast for growth in  1997 has been reduced a  bit to reflect the labor unrest that may  continue to simmer and will exert a  negative impact on growth over the first half of  the year that will not all be  made up subsequently.

U.S. real exports and imports. We  estimate that during the fourth quarter of 1996 real exports of goods and services grew  more than 20  percent at  an annual rate, substantially stronger growth than in  previous quarters last year and than we  projected in  the December Greenbook. Trade data through November show rapid growth in  all the  major components of  exports, and we  have no  basis for assuming that strength was not maintained through December. Exports of  services, agricultural products, semiconductors, and a  wide range of  other merchandise, especially machinery, were robust. Some of the reported strength in  fourth-quarter exports reflects residual seasonality in  the data and some a  bunching of  high-value shipments. We  estimate that real imports of goods and services in the fourth quarter grew 5.7 percent, annual rate, a  bit less than projected in December, as the volume of  oil imports decreased and growth of imports of  semiconductors remained low. As a  consequence, net exports are estimated to  have made a  positive 1.7 percentage point contribution to real GDP growth at  an  annual rate during 1996:Q4.

In  the current quarter, the volume of  exports of goods and services is expected to remain high but to grow only slightly, as the effects of  transitory bunching of  shipments in  the fourth quarter is unwound. In  addition, the slowdown in  export growth reflects our projection of some downward pull in  the first quarter because of  residual seasonality in  the data. With the level of U.S. economic activity now projected to  be  higher in the first quarter than forecast in  the previous Greenbook, we  have revised up our projection for the volume of  imported goods and services and look for real net exports to subtract 1.3 percentage points at an  annual rate from real GDP growth in  the current quarter, somewhat more than projected in  December.

Over the remainder of  the forecast period, total real exports should grow at an  annual rate of about 7 percent. Growth of  the volume of nonagricultural exports other than computers and semiconductors should be  supported by continued moderate output growth in  our trading partners. However, the lagged effects of the recent dollar appreciation should restrain growth of  these exports somewhat this year and  more next year. The volumes of  exports of computers and semiconductors are expected to continue growing rapidly. Service exports are forecast to  strengthen a  bit in 1998, largely reflecting a more rapid response of  service exports to the dollar's projected decline than is the case for goods.

Total real imports of goods and services are projected to grow at an annual rate of about 9 percent during the final three quarters of  this year and 7 percent during next year. The volume of  non-oil imports other than computers and semiconductors is forecast to expand at an  annual rate of  more than 7 percent over the remainder of 1997 and then slow to about 4-1/2 percent in 1998. With non-oil import prices projected to  decline further this year, relative prices should boost these imports in  the near term  but be  about neutral in  their effect next year. Growth of  the volume of  imported computers is expected to remain rapid while that of imported semiconductors, which actually was negative in  mid-1996, is projected to  rebound during the current quarter and should continue to  be  strong through the end of  the forecast period.

We  expect the quantity of  oil imports to remain flat this quarter and then to rise during the remainder of  the forecast period, as  consumption expands with the increase in U.S. economic activity, and U.S. production declines.

Oil prices. The projected price of  imported oil has been revised up about $2.75/b for the first quarter and nearly $1.50/b in the second quarter, reflecting the high spot oil prices that have prevailed through January. The price of  imported oil is assumed to have peaked in  1996:Q4 and  is  projected to stabilize at  a  WTI price and oil import unit value of $19.75/b and $17.25/b, respectively, by the end of 1997. This end-point has been revised up from that in the December Greenbook because of  the persistence of strong economic activity in  the United States and the projected weakening of the dollar at  the end of  the forecast period.

Prices of  non-oil imports and exports. Prices of  agricultural exports are expected to continue to  fall through the middle of  this year and then to rise moderately in 1998 as  more abundant supplies continue to  move prices down from recent peaks for a  time. Prices of nonagricultural exports are projected to  be about flat on  average this year but to  move up  somewhat next year in line with comparable U.S. producer prices. Prices of  non-oil imports are projected to decline further this quarter and next, reflecting the strength in the dollar, and to rise modestly as the projected decline in  the value of  the dollar begins to show through.

(Percent change from end of  previous period except as noted, AR)

<!-- missing-text -->

Nominal trade and current account balances. The nominal trade deficit on  goods and services is estimated to  have narrowed in  the fourth quarter to $105 billion from its third-quarter level of $135 billion. During 1997 and 1998, the trade deficit is projected to resume widening, reaching about $135 billion in  the fourth quarter of 1998. The  balance on  net investment income is expected to deteriorate further over the forecast period as  well, reflecting growing U.S. net indebtedness. As a  consequence, while the current account deficit is projected to  have narrowed in  the fourth quarter, we  expect it to  widen over the forecast period, bringing the average for 1998 to  about $200 billion or 2.4 percent of  GDP.

Alternative Simulation

Our alternative simulation explores the implication of leaving the dollar unchanged at its recent level over the entire forecast period. Federal Reserve policy is assumed to  maintain an  unchanged federal funds rate. Under this alternative path for the dollar, U.S. real GDP growth and inflation would be  no  different from the baseline this year. However, with  the dollar remaining stronger throughout the forecast period, U.S. real output growth in 1998 would be lessened by  0.2 percentage points and consumer price inflation by  0.1 percentage points.

ALTERNATIVE EXCHANGE RATE PROJECTION (Percent change, Q4 to Q4)

<!-- missing-text -->

Strictly Confidential (PR) Class II-FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. West German data through 1991, All  German thereafter.
- 2.  CPI excluding mortgage interest payments, which is the targeted inflation rate.

Strictly Confidential (FR)

Class II-FOMC

OUTLOOK FOR FOREIGN REAL GDP  AND CONSUMER PRICES: SELECTED COUNTRIES

(Percent, quarterly change at an  annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Year/Year changes.
- 2.  CPI excluding mortgage interest payments, which is the targeted inflation rate.

<!-- missing-text -->

- I/ Merchandise exports excluding agricultural products, computers, and semiconductors.
- 2/ Merchandise imports excluding oil, computers, and semiconductors.

Strictly Confidential (FR) Class II-FOMC

US

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1/ Merchandise exports excluding agricultural products, computers, and  semiconductors.
- 2/ Merchandise imports excluding oil, computers, and semiconductors.

Strictly

Confidential

(FR)

Class

II-FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1/ Merchandise exports excluding agricultural products, computers, and  semiconductors.
- 2/ Merchandise imports excluding oil, computers, and  semiconductors.