Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CLASS

III

FOMC

August 16, 1996

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of  Governors of  the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Housing Markets

Single-family housing starts fell to 1.13 million units in July from a  revised level of 1.20 million units for June that is slightly lower than the preliminary estimate. The decline in  single-family homebuilding in July is consistent with recent indications of slackening in  demand such as the  August report from the  National Association of  Homebuilders on  new  home sales in  early August. The final results of  that survey showed a  somewhat larger decline in builders' ratings of new  home sales than was indicated in  the preliminary figures that were cited in the Greenbook.

Multifamily housing starts increased 18 percent in  July, offsetting a  decline in  June and continuing the oscillating pattern that has prevailed so far this year.

At the regional level, starts in  July decreased 4  percent in the South and fell 12 percent in the West. Starts rose 2  percent in the Northeast and jumped 17 percent in  the Midwest, where construction bounced back from a  low reading in  June.

Consumer Sentiment

According to  the preliminary report, the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment was about unchanged in  early August at a  level that is at the high end of  the relatively favorable range seen since early 1994. Respondents expressed somewhat more upbeat views of their current and future personal financial situations, but somewhat less positive views of  appliance-buying conditions and expected business conditions.

Among results not included in the overall index, the indexes of expected unemployment, home-buying conditions, and car-buying conditions all held about steady at their relatively favorable July levels. Consumers' willingness to use credit to finance large purchases was unchanged, but their willingness to  use savings was down sharply.

The mean value of expected inflation over the coming year held steady in early August at 4.3 percent while the median value moved up 0.2 percentage point to 3.1 percent. The mean and median values of  expected inflation over the next five to  ten years were unchanged at 4.2 percent and 3.1 percent, respectively.

Note

The staff forecast presented in Part 1  incorporates staff estimates of  the likely revisions to the NIPA data where published BEA estimates are not final. A  discussion of  the staff estimates for 1996:Q2 is found at the beginning of the  nonfinancial developments section of  Part 2.

Private  ousing Activity H (Millions  f  units; asonally  djusted  nnual  rate) o se a a

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. p Preliminary.    Revised. n.a Not  available. r

Private Housing Starts

(Seasonally adjusted annual  rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

Indicators  of  Housing  Demand

(Seasonally adjusted; FRB  seasonals)

Builders'  Rating of  New Home Sales

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  The  index  is  alculated rom National ssociation f  Homebuilders data as the  proportion f  respondents rating urrent  sales  as good c f A o o c to  excellent  inus the  proportion ating  hem  as poor. m r t

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer Homebuying Attitudes

<!-- missing-text -->

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

* --Indicates the  question is one of the five equally-weighted components of the index of sentiment.

- (p) --  Preliminary
- (f) --Final

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and  buying conditions are the  percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the  percent reporting 'bad  times' (or 'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is the fraction expecting unemployment to rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to  fall.

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations M 1

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Average  for wo-week  reserve  aintenance  eriod losest   date  shown.  Last  observation   he verage or  he aintenance eriod  nding t m p c o is t a f t m p e August  14,  1996.

- 4. Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t 1 a.m.  ondon time. f E d a 1 L
- 5.  Most  recent  bservation  ased  on  one-day hursday  quote nd  futures  arket ndex hanges. o b T a m i c
- 6.  Merril  Lynch  Master Ihigh-yield  nd  index omposite. I bo c
- 7. Quotes  for eek ending riday revious  o  date  shown. w F p t

COMMERCIAL BANK CREDIT

(Percentage ange;  seasonally  djusted  nnual ate) ch a a r 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  Includes  unicipal ecurities, eign  overnment  securities, porate  onds, quities,  d  trading  ccount ssets. m s for g cor b e an a a

- 4.  Includes  stimates  f onsumer  loans hat  ave  been  securitized banks  and are till  tstanding. e o c t h by s ou