Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS III FOMC

November 8, 1996

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of Governors of  the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE  DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Productivity and Costs

Output per  hour in  the nonfarm business sector increased 0.2 percent at  an  annual rate in  the third quarter after increasing 0.5 percent in  the second quarter. The third-quarter figure is based on  BEA's advance estimate of  a  2.3 percent gain in nonfarm business output and a  2.1 percent gain in  the hours worked of  all persons. Growth in  productivity from the same quarter of  last year amounted to 0.3 percent, down from 0.8 percent in the previous four quarters.

Nonfarm compensation per hour increased 3.9 percent at an annual rate in  the third quarter, little different from the revised 3.8 percent rate in  the second quarter. By  comparison, the growth in  hourly compensation in  the ECI reported last month was 2.5 percent in the third quarter, down from 3.2 percent in  the second quarter. Although both  measures of  hourly compensation show the same long-run trends, large discrepancies between their rates of change are common in  the quarterly data. Compared with the ECI, the productivity and cost data showed substantially faster growth in wages and salaries, but a  bit slower growth in  benefits.

Unit labor costs in  the nonfarm business sector rose 3.7 percent at an  annual rate in  the third quarter, bringing the change over the four quarters ended in  September to 3.4 percent, up slightly from the 3.2 percent increase in the previous four-quarter period.

Wholesale Trade Inventories

Wholesale inventories declined in September at an  annual rate of $39.6 billion (book  value). In  addition, the change in  wholesale stocks in  August was revised down substantially; the data now show a drawdown of $3.3 billion in  that month compared with an  increase of $14.6 billion in  the preliminary report. While sizable reductions in stocks of  motor vehicles were reported for both  August and September, stocks held by  many other types of  wholesale establishments also fell. For the quarter as a  whole, inventories of  non-automotive stocks in  the wholesale trade sector declined at a $10.4 billion annual rate, considerably less than the $4  billion increase assumed by  BEA  in  preparing the advance estimate of real GDP for the third quarter.

In  the non-auto categories, stocks of  farm products fell even more sharply in  September than in the two preceding months. Given the steep price declines for crops in September, a  large portion of the  book-value drop in  this category probably reflected changes in prices rather than changes in  real quantities. Elsewhere, stock accumulation occurred at  distributors of  capital goods--machinery and professional and commercial equipment--but inventories in  most other categories were reduced.

Sales at  non-auto wholesale establishments rose 0.9 percent in September, and their inventory-sales ratio fell to 1.23 months.

LABOR PRODUCTIVITY AND  COSTS

(Percent change from  preceding period at  compound annual rate; based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

CHANGES IN MANUFACTURING AND TRADE INVENTORIES (Billions of dollars at  annual rates; based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

INVENTORIES RELATIVE TO SALES

(Months' supply; based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Ratio of end-of-period inventories to average monthly sales for the  period.

SELECTED INVENTORY-SALES RATIOS

(Months' supply, based on  Census book-value data, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Inventory-Sales Ratios,  by Major Sector

Manufacturing

(Book value)

<!-- missing-text -->

Wholesale Excluding  Motor Vehicles

<!-- missing-text -->

Retail

<!-- missing-text -->

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations' M

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Average  for wo-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest   date hown.  Last bservation   the verage  to  date  for he aintenance eriod nding t m p c o s o is a t m p e November 6,  1996.

- 4.  Bid  rates  or  urodollar  eposits  t f E d a 11 a.m. ondon time. L
- 5.  Most  recent  bservation sed  on  one-day  Thursday uote nd  futures  arket ndex  changes. o ba q a m i
- 6. Merrill  ynch Master I  high-yield nd  index omposite.1996. L I bo c
- 7.  Quotes  for eek  ending riday revious  o  date hown. w F p t s