Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Part 1

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Summary and  Outlook

January  26,  1996

Strictly  nfidential  FR) Class Co ( II FOMC

January 6,  1996 2

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

_

____

___

I

Overview

Because of delays in government releases, we  have received relatively few economic statistics since the December Greenbook. Based on those we  do  have, as  well as on  the available anecdotal information, the economy appears to  have expanded slowly in  the past few  months. Disappointing sales and attendant inventory imbalances in a  few sectors, and the disruptions of  activity associated with the government shutdown and severe winter weather, seem to  be cutting into the growth of employment and output

Some of  the recent negative impulses are by  their nature transitory, but the denouement of  the ongoing dispute over the federal budget is far from clear. The prospects for agreement on a multiyear balanced budget plan look very poor for now. But in  just the past couple of days, the saga has taken a  new  turn. with the GOP leadership indicating that they will offer President Clinton a slimmed-down fiscal package in  conjunction with a  debt ceiling bill We think there are many ways in  which even this proposition could founder, so we  are now  anticipating simply that a  series of continuing resolutions and appropriations bills will impose a  modest degree of  fiscal restraint over the projection period. We've also assumed that, one way or  another further government shutdowns and debt default will be  avoided.

Looking at the other fundamentals shaping the intermediate trends in the economy, we  think that, if  the nominal federal funds rate is held at or  near the present 5-1/2 percent level real GDP growth will average somewhere in  the vicinity of  potential over the next two years--that is, a  little less than 2  percent per annum, on the new chain-weighted basis. This is somewhat faster than the 1-1/2 percent GDP gain we  now estimate for 1995. We  anticipate that

the favorable effects of last year's bond and stock market rallies will increasingly offset the residual effects of  the 1994 run-up in interest rates, helping to  keep domestic private demand on  a moderate uptrend. In  addition, output was damped last year by major crop losses, and we  are assuming a  return to  normal harvests. This accounts for about half the acceleration in GDP from 1995 to 1996.

In these circumstances, unemployment and industrial capacity utilization rates are not expected to  change materially. We interpret those rates as denoting relatively tight supply conditions, especially in labor markets, but  we  also perceive that inflation expectations are quiescent and that production bottlenecks are few. Thus, while we  think it likely that compensation will accelerate a  bit over 1996-97, we  are projecting that core CPI inflation will remain in the vicinity of 3 percent. Overall CPI inflation may also move up to that pace for a  time, owing to less favorable contributions from the food and energy components.

Recent developments

Because of  the delays in  the collection and processing of  data caused by the government shutdown, we  still have only fragmentary information on spending in the fourth quarter. Our most current readings on economic activity come from the labor market, where private payrolls increased modestly in  December, apart from the return of  Boeing strikers. Production worker hours increased at  a 2  percent annual rate for the quarter, matching the gain of  the third quarter. The unemployment rate held at 5.6 percent in December and was little changed, on average, in  the fourth quarter. All told, these figures would suggest the likelihood of a  real GDP gain in excess of 2  percent, even after allowing for the federal shutdown.

The recent news from the industrial sector is a  bit less upbeat, however. Factory output was little changed in  December and posted a  gain of 1-3/4 percent at an  annual rate for the fourth quarter. Moreover, looking into the early part of 1996, surveys of manufacturers have pointed to  weak orders and production, reflecting inventory overhangs in  at least some cases. Notably, significant cuts in  motor vehicle assemblies are under way. Orders for steel appear to  be  holding up  well for the  moment; however, anecdotal reports indicate that the  high-tech sector--the driver of  IP growth in  recent months--may be  moving onto a  less spectacular trajectory. On  the plus side, though, Boeing has returned to its pre-strike level of production.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: The previous projection lines for the  NIPA series reflect BEA's advance estimate of  the alternative chain quantity index for 1995:Q3 and the December staff projection expressed in  1994 dollars for all other periods.

Consumer spending appears to  have grown moderately in  the fourth quarter, supported by  further gains in real incomes and last year's big increase in  household net worth. The latest data from BEA show real PCE gyrating in  October and November--but the level of spending in  November was still 2  percent (annual rate) above the

average in the third quarter. Light vehicle sales strengthened in December, boosted in  part by  more generous incentive programs. Spending on luxury goods such as jewelry reportedly was brisk during the holiday season, and sales of  consumer electronics apparently also were robust. Outside of these areas, however, holiday sales were described as disappointing by  many retailers, especially those selling apparel. In  putting together our projection, we  have tended to discount the stories of  weak chain store sales. In  the past, the chain store reports have not been closely correlated with the Census Bureau's estimates of retail sales. In addition, it is difficult at this time to sort out whether consumer demand really was sluggish or simply was spread across a  broader range of  retail establishments, given the rapid expansion of retail capacity in  the past few years.

Undoubtedly, some retailers emerged from the holiday season with excess stocks that will have to  be  liquidated in the first quarter. Financial strains in  the retail industry are likely to precipitate additional store closings and inventory liquidations. But thus far, there have been remarkably few  reports of troubling overhangs. The recent Beige Book noted that many retailers had been cautious in  stocking up for the holidays, so that sales disappointments did not lead to severe imbalances.

Signals from the housing market have been mixed in  recent weeks, and the harsh winter weather in  mid-January clearly disrupted activity. Housing starts moved up further in  November, reflecting a rise in  the construction of  multifamily units, but sales of  new and existing homes posted declines in  November and December, respectively. In  contrast, builders' ratings of sales remained in the favorable range in  early January, and the  MBA's index of

mortgage applications for  home purchase rose to  a  record level before the January storms, suggesting a  strengthening of  activity.

The December PPI and CPI are not yet available, but anecdotal information and commodity market developments do  not suggest much change in recent inflation trends. Prices of agricultural products have risen in  the wake of 1995's disappointing harvest, but falling coffee prices are likely to have an offsetting effect on grocery prices in  the near term. Colder-than-normal temperatures boosted crude oil and natural gas prices in  the fourth quarter, and private survey data indicate a  substantial rise in retail gasoline prices in December. In  contrast, discounting reportedly has been widespread of late for other consumer goods--especially cars and apparel. On the labor cost front, average hourly earnings increased 3.2 percent over the twelve months of 1995--an acceleration of 0.4 percentage point from a  year earlier; such a  pickup would be  consistent with the scattered anecdotal reports of  wage pressures. Unfortunately, the broader Employment Cost Indexes for December will not now  be published until mid-February.

Key  assumptions

December's quarter-point cut in  the federal funds rate ran counter to  the baseline assumption of stability in  the last Greenbook. The funds rate is now  assumed to remain close to 5-1/2 percent over the projection period. The projected path of long-term interest rates has also been lowered very slightly, though we  still expect that rates will move upward somewhat in  coming months, as the economic expansion shows renewed signs of life and expectations of further Fed easing dissipate. With the backup in bond yields and some disappointment as well in  corporate earnings, stock prices may  well come under downward pressure; however, we  have not anticipated a  major setback and expect that stock prices will

fluctuate only moderately over the next two years. Meanwhile, it seems likely that banks will become a  shade more cautious in  their lending in the period ahead; we  do not foresee a  substantial deterioration in credit availability for either households or businesses, but the financial stimulus experienced in  the past few years as credit terms and standards have eased will no longer be present.

At  the beginning of  this week, we  concluded that the chances of an agreement being reached on even a  more back-loaded and gimmicky balanced budget deal had slipped far enough that we should alter our fiscal assumption. We  decided to  assume instead that there would be no significant changes to entitlement spending or  taxes, and that the outcome of  the dispute between the  Administration and the Republicans in  the Congress would be  the passage of a  stringent set of  appropriations or continuing resolutions to  cover the discretionary programs not already funded for  fiscal 1996. This implies about a  $20 billion deficit reduction relative to  baseline for the fiscal year--only a  little less than our previous package. Without a  bipartisan, multiyear budget agreement, however, the outlook for fiscal 1997 and beyond became more uncertain--and more sensitive to the results of the elections this fall. It  seemed reasonable to anticipate, though, that the restraints on discretionary spending would be maintained--holding the deficit again about $20 billion below the OBRA-93 baseline. This would be about $10 billion less deficit reduction in fiscal 1997 than in the last Greenbook.

The discussion of  a  "downpayment" package since the President's State of  the Union message obviously calls our revised scenario into question. However, we  have decided not to  make a  further, lastminute change to our assumption. First, the proposal described by

the Republican leadership has not been fully developed, let alone spelled out publicly in  concrete terms. Second, it is  far from clear that agreement will be reached, given the complex politics involved. However, if  an agreement were reached along the lines we understand are contemplated, it likely would involve little overall change in  the fiscal 1996 budget balance, but it  could largely eliminate much, if  not all, of the fiscal 1997 deficit reduction.

Under our policy assumption, and our economic scenario, the unified budget deficit would be $163 billion in  fiscal 1996--down from $169 billion in  the  December Greenbook--and $193 billion in fiscal 1997--the same as in  the last forecast.

Foreign economic activity is expected to  be  about the same over the next two years as in  the December Greenbook, as a  weaker outlook for Canada and Western Europe is  nearly matched by stronger prospects for Japan. On  a  U.S. export-weighted basis, foreign real GDP is projected to grow something more than 3-1/4 percent in 1996 and again in 1997. The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of  the dollar has firmed over the intermeeting period, partly reflecting interest rate cuts abroad, and is projected to remain near its current level over the forecast period--an upward revision of  a little more than 2  percent from the December Greenbook. We  have made only minor adjustments in  the near term to the outlook for crude oil prices: The spot price of  WTI is  projected to average around $18 per barrel in  the first half of  this year, depressed slightly by  market concerns about Iraq's possible limited reentry to the world oil market. As these concerns recede, we  expect crude oil prices to stabilize at $18.50 per barrel in  the third quarter.

The Outlook for the Economy in 1996 and 1997

Real GDP is projected to increase at  an  annual rate of  about 3/4 percent in the first quarter. Carmakers are cutting assemblies in  response to unexpected weakness in sales in early January, and we think the desire to  trim stocks is  restraining output in  other sectors as  well. The severe winter weather is a  small negative for the quarter, but it  is more than offset in our forecast by  the reopening of  the federal government and the resumption of production at Boeing. With the  inventory adjustment well along and construction activity returning to normal, real GDP growth is projected to accelerate in the second quarter.

Other than the slightly weaker outlook for the current quarter, the staff projection is little changed from the December Greenbook. We  have made several, largely offsetting, adjustments to the composition of real GDP growth, reflecting the stronger dollar and the slightly lower level of interest rates, but the overall contour of  the forecast is  the same as last time. We continue to  believe that the economic fundamentals are consistent with a  sustained uptrend in economic activity, averaging close to 2  percent over 1996-97. Growth in  private domestic final purchases is projected to be moderate because of  the already ample level of spending on consumer durables and negative accelerator effects on  investment.

In addition to shifting to BEA's chain indexes, we  have incorporated the definitional changes to the government accounts as well as the methodological changes (such as  the new  method for calculating economic depreciation). We  also have done a  preliminary review of  a  number of  key  macroeconomic relationships. Among other things, we  have fine-tuned our estimates of potential output growth. Based on  the new  data as well as  a  reassessment of  trends in labor force participation, the staff has made just a  minor downward

adjustment to the growth rate of potential GDP--from 2  percent (using BEA's previously published chain data) to 1.9 percent.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: The previous projection line projection expressed in 1994 dollars. reflects the December staff

Consumer spending. Real consumer spending is projected to increase at a  2-1/2 percent annual pace over the forecast period. Although concerns about job security have grown and consumer debt burdens have risen further, credit remains readily available overall, and mortgage refinancing is improving the financial position of some households. In addition, we  likely have yet to see the full effects of  last year's gain in stock market wealth. Indeed, were we simply to  apply standard rules of  thumb regarding wealth effects, we  would have a  substantially higher path for consumption even with the muted asset appreciation anticipated in the period ahead.

In  the near term, we  expect the blizzard of 1996 to  produce considerable volatility in  the monthly consumption data. Many purchases delayed by  bad weather are likely to  be  made up soon;

sales of some winter goods may  well be stronger than otherwise would have been  the case. Moreover, colder-than-normal temperatures in many parts of the country will boost utility bills. However, for some workers and businesses, the income and sales lost during the storm will never be  made up, and  we  would expect this to  have a small negative influence on  consumer spending.

Durable goods are projected to remain the fastest growing component of real PCE, but the gains are likely to  be  moderate by recent standards. The normal cyclical catch-up in  durable purchases is  well behind us, and the level of spending on  durables is  already fairly high. Purchases of  computers and innovative home electronic equipment may post further sizable growth, but sales of  cars and light trucks are projected to settle in at  around 14-1/2 million units--a little below the 1995 pace. We  expect only slow growth in consumer purchases of  nondurables and services.

Residential investment. Mortgage rates have fallen slightly since December, and cash-flow measures of affordability are very favorable. Mortgage credit is readily available to  most borrowers, although there have been a  few reports of  a  tightening of underwriting standards and of  applicants running into qualifying problems because of  their elevated debt-service commitments. With real income growth expected to  be  moderate over the next two years and only small increases anticipated in  mortgage rates, we  are projecting total housing starts to  hold near the 1.4 million unit mark. Single-family starts are projected to run around 1.1 million units, on  average--up from last year but still below the 1.2 million unit pace of 1994, when mortgage rates plunged even lower and there was greater pent-up demand. Multifamily starts are projected to trend gradually upward, reaching 290,000 units in 1997, as  falling

vacancy rates in some parts of  the country stimulate the construction of  new  rental properties.

Business fixed investment. Business capital spending decelerated sharply last spring and is projected to grow 2-1/4 percent in 1996 and 3-1/2 percent in 1997. In  the industrial sector, the utilization of  existing capacity already has fallen, and with sales expected to grow only moderately, firms will not want to make major additions to their capital stocks. Capacity needs in the retail sector clearly are limited as well.

With respect to  producers' durable equipment, our  forecast has been marked down sharply from the December Greenbook, but this mainly reflects the shift to the chain measures of spending rather than a  significantly more pessimistic outlook for equipment investment. The new  chain numbers give a  much smaller weight to computers and other high-tech equipment, which means that the fluctuations in-this sector will have less of an  effect on real GDP. We  expect the  boom in  high-tech equipment to slow significantly, with spending on  office and computing equipment posting below-trend increases over the  next two years. Business spending on  motor vehicles is projected to  be sluggish, with outright weakness emerging in  the purchases of  heavy trucks. Spending on  other types of  capital equipment is projected to level off.

Outlays for nonresidential structures are projected to increase 3  percent in 1996 and only 0.5 percent in 1997. Conditions in  the office sector have improved and industrial construction remains favorable as  well; we  expect building activity in  both of  these markets to increase for a  while longer. However, the retail sector is overbuilt, and a  correction in  this market looks increasingly overdue.

Business inventories. Despite the reports of slow sales, we do not think that most businesses emerged from the holiday season seriously overburdened with inventories. But we  are anticipating that a  step-down in inventory investment will depress growth by about 0.6 percentage point in  the first quarter and another 0.4 percentage point in  the second quarter. Thereafter, given only moderate sales expectations, we  expect firms to continue to attempt to economize on inventory holdings, resulting in  a  low  rate of accumulation and a  mild downtrend in  the inventory-sales ratio over the projection period.

Government. The revised NIPA data paint a  significantly different picture for federal spending in  the third quarter than that in the  December Greenbook. Real federal government consumption and investment is estimated to  have declined 5-1/2 percent at an annual rate in the third quarter; the previous estimate of real federal purchases had shown an  increase of  almost 5  percent. The revised figure is in  better accord with our assessment of  the underlying trends in  spending, and as a  result, we  have tempered the drop in spending previously built into the fourth quarter of 1995. On the negative side, the combined shutdowns of  the government now are estimated to  have shaved 4-1/2 percentage points off the growth in real federal spending in  the fourth quarter.

Real federal spending is projected to  fall at a  3-3/4 percent annual rate in  the first quarter of 1996, held down by  the closing of  government offices and the tight limits on  spending imposed by the continuing resolutions. Reflecting the downtrend in  defense and our assumptions about cuts in  discretionary spending, we are projecting real federal consumption and investment expenditures to fall 2  percent in 1996 and another 2-3/4 percent in 1997.

As regards the outlook for state and local governments, the revised NIPA data are now  in  accord with other information that has showed a  strengthening in  the fiscal position of this sector in recent years. With the better financial picture, we  expect spending by  states and localities to run  a  bit faster than in  the December Greenbook: Real government consumption and investment expenditures are projected to increase 2-1/4 percent this year and 2-1/2 percent in 1997. Still, these growth rates remain low  by  historical standards and are held down by reduced support from the federal government and the aversion of  most state and local governments to raising taxes to pay  for new spending initiatives.

Net exports. Developments in  the external sector are expected to exert a  restraining influence on real activity compared with the neutral path in  the December Greenbook. This weaker outlook reflects the upward revision to  the level of  the dollar in  this forecast. (See the International Developments section for a  more complete discussion.)

Labor markets. In an  environment of slower growth, businesses are expected to remain cautious about hiring and focused on improving efficiency. As a  result, payroll employment is projected to slow substantially over the forecast period: After increasing about 150,000 per month in 1995, payrolls are expected to rise an average of a  little more than 100,000 per month in 1996-97. On the productivity side of the equation, we  are projecting that nonfarm business output per hour will rise, on average, at close to the estimated trend of 1.1 percent per  year.

We  also have reassessed the outlook for labor force growth. Despite the continued expansion in  job opportunities, the participation rate has been essentially flat for the past six years. Given our projection of only modest employment gains, we see no

reason for this situation to change over the forecast period, and as a  result, we  no longer expect the labor force participation rate to move up slightly from the low  fourth-quarter level. All told, we are projecting that the unemployment rate will remain close to its recent level, at just over 5-1/2 percent.

Wages and prices. With continued tightness in  labor markets, we  are anticipating somewhat faster growth in compensation per hour. After a  projected increase of 2.6 percent in 1995, the ECI for private industry workers is forecast to rise 2.8 percent in 1996 and 3.1 percent in 1997. Reports of  labor shortages have grown over the past six  months, and  we expect wages to accelerate gradually over the projection period. We also are guessing that benefits costs will start to increase more rapidly. In this regard, the behavior of  health insurance costs will be key. In  particular, we  think that savings on  health insurance costs will be  harder to come by  now  that many firms already have shifted to  managed care programs.

<!-- missing-text -->

We  also are anticipating some deterioration in recent price trends. After a  projected increase of 2.7 percent in 1995, the CPI is expected to  rise 3  percent in 1996 and 2.9 percent in 1997. Part of  this pickup reflects developments in food and energy markets. Food prices are forecast to accelerate slightly in 1996 in response

to  tight grain supplies, and energy prices are projected to  be boosted by  the rise in  crude oil prices. Excluding food and energy, the  CPI is projected to rise 2.8 percent in 1996 and 3  percent in 1997. Prices are held down this year by  marginally lower non-oil import prices, but with labor and product markets remaining tight, we  expect core inflation to  rise in 1997.

Alternative simulations

We  have generated two alternative simulations this month with the Board staff's quarterly econometric model in  which the federal funds rate is lowered (or  raised) relative to the path in the Greenbook. In  these alternative interest rate scenarios, the funds rate is lowered (raised) by  25 basis points per quarter during 1996. In  the lower rate simulation, real GDP growth is 1/4 percentage point higher this year and 3/4 percentage point higher in 1997. The unemployment rate is reduced by 0.3 percentage point by  the end of next year, while CPI inflation is 0.3 percentage point higher than in  the baseline forecast. The effects of  a  tightening of policy are symmetric.

<!-- missing-text -->

STRICTLY

CONFIDENTIAL

&lt;FR&gt;

STAFF  PROJECTIONS

UNEMPLOYMENT

CLASS

II OMC F

OF CHANGES

IN GDP,  PRICES, AND

(Percent,  nnual ate) a r

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1 Fixed  weights
- 2 Chain  type

January  26,  1996

STRICTLY

CONFIDENTIAL

&lt;FR&gt;

REAL  GROSS

DOMESTIC

PRODUCT

AND  RELATED

ITEMS,  QUARTERLY

VALUES

<!-- missing-text -->

CONFIDENTIAL

&lt;FR&gt;

REAL

GROSS

DOMESTIC

PRODUCT

AND

RELATED

ITEMS, QUARTERLY

VALUES

CLASS

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Published
- *  Staff  stimate, ain-weighted  asis. e ch b

1.5

<!-- missing-text -->

Components may not  sum to otal  ue  to ounding. t d r

January 26, 1996

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1 OMB's July 1995 deficit estimates are $160 billion in FY95, $163 billion in  FY96 and $179 billion in FY97. CBO's December 1995 baseline deficit estimates (including the fiscal dividend from  assumed enactment of congressional budget program) are $161 billion in  FY95, $172 billion in FY96 and  $182 billion in  FY97. Budget receipts, outlays, and  surplus/deficit include corresponding Social Security (OASDI) categories. The OASDI surplus is excluded from the on-budget deficit and  shown separately as off-budget, as  classified under current law. The Postal Service deficit is included in  off-budget outlays beginning in  FY90.
- 2.  OMB's July 1995 deficit estimates, excluding deposit insurance spending, are $177 billion in  FY95, $170 billion in  FY96 and $182 billion in FY97 CBO's December 1995 baseline deficit estimates (including the fiscal dividend from assumed enactment of congressional budget program), excluding deposit insurance spending, are $177 billion in  FY95, $180 billion in  FY96 and $186 billion in FY97.
- 3. Other means of financing are  checks issued less checks paid, accrued items, and  changes in  other financial assets and  liabilities.
- 4 HEB is the NIPA current and  capital account surplus in  current dollars, with cyclically sensitive receipts and  outlays adjusted to the level of  potential output generated by  1.8  percent real growth and  an  associated unemployment rate of 6 percent. Quarterly figures for  change in HEB  and FI  are  not at annual rates. Change in  HEB, as a  percent of nominal potential GDP, is reversed in sign. FI is the  weighted difference of  discretionary changes in federal spending and  taxes (in  chained 1992 dollars), scaled by  real federal consumption plus investment. For change in  HEB  and FI, negative values indicate restraint.

Recent Developments

In response to  the System's quarter-point easing in  midDecember, major commercial banks lowered their prime rate a  quarter point, and most market interest rates declined 5  to 10 basis points. The bond market rallied further through year-end, spurred by  various reports of tepid sales and growing anticipation of  a  budget compromise that would produce meaningful deficit reduction. At year-end, most long-term rates stood at two-year lows and the thirty-year Treasury rate had dipped below the 6  percent barrier A week later long-term rates reversed course on  news that the budget talks had reached a  stalemate. However as market participants coalesced around the view that considerable spending restraint would occur even in the absence of a  balanced budget deal and became more confident about the prospect of  further System easing, long-term rates moved back down. On  net yields on  short and intermediateterm Treasuries fell as  much as 30 basis points over the intermeeting period, while yields at longer maturities declined about 10 basis points.

Since the December FOMC meeting, prices of  equities have fluctuated in sympathy with the bond market and major stock indexes are up 2  percent to 3  1/2 percent on  balance. The boost from lower rates was initially offset by  a  somewhat less bullish view about prospects for corporate earnings growth, especially in the technology sector where a  slew of  companies moved to soften the impact of potentially disappointing fourth-quarter earnings by warning that expectations would be difficult to  meet In  the event, fourth-quarter reports to  date have, on average, come in  somewhat above revised forecasts, Moreover the results reported by  several

technology sector mainstays, including IBM, Intel, and Microsoft, handily exceeded consensus forecasts

With long-term interest rates remaining attractive, corporate bond issuance has moved back up  to  the robust pace observed before the  holiday lull Nonfinancial issuers apparently have continued to use  many of  the proceeds to  pay off more expensive bonds or shorterterm debt. Despite a  gradual widening over recent months, quality spreads on corporate bonds remain generally modest relative to historical averages. Even after accounting for the normal seasonal slowing, gross equity issuance over the intermeeting period moderated from its very strong pace in  the autumn. However, the sizable number of issues in registration points to a  resumption of robust issuance in the near term, absent a  significant decline in equity prices. Nonetheless, gross issuance continues to  be overwhelmed by the value of  shares retired through stock repurchase programs and  mergers.

The favorable rates also helped to  boost gross offerings of municipal bonds in  November and December to the highest two-month rate since 1993. In  early January, issuance slowed some, but it has since picked up. Even with the heavier gross offerings of  late, outstanding long-term tax-exempt debt has continued to fall We estimate that the stock of  bonds declined more than $50 billion last year owing to continued heavy retirements of  advance-refunded debt

In  the household sector available data point to a  pickup in home mortgage refinancing. In  addition, the  Mortgage Bankers Association index of  applications to purchase homes fluctuated around new  highs over much of  the intermeeting period, though dropping back in  January, probably reflecting the effects of unusually severe weather in  many areas. The fixed-rate share of conventional mortgage originations was reported at 81 percent for

November and likely has risen further Consumer credit expanded in October and November at about its third-quarter pace, and consumer lending at banks (adjusted for securitization) remained strong in December Delinquency rates have turned upward, and the January Senior Loan Officer Survey indicated some tightening of  standards for consumer loans, particularly for new  credit card accounts. Nonetheless, continued tight rate spreads on  credit-card-backed securities suggest that the market does not believe that debt servicing strains in  the household sector will become severe.

Growth in the broad monetary aggregates picked up in December from a  very sluggish pace in  November M2 expanded at a  pace of 5-3/4 percent and M3 grew at a  rate of 4-1/4 percent leaving the former in  the upper range of  its growth cone and the latter a  tad above its cone. Data for January point to an  acceleration in  both aggregates, accompanying a  sharp advance in bank credit Both loans and securities at banks expanded sluggishly in  December Growth in business loans likely was held down in part by  some substitution toward longer-term capital market financing, but preliminary data for the first half of  January point to a  rebound. The January Senior Loan Officer Survey found that, for the first time in  three years, banks on  net had tightened lending standards for business loans; nonetheless, respondents continue to report easier lending terms, including reduced spreads. Real estate lending was quite weak in  December, but it appears to  be rising markedly this month, partly owing to acquisitions of  thrifts by  banks.

The staff expects the federal deficit to expand to almost $100 billion in  the first quarter Under current staff projections, in late February the Treasury will deplete its cash balances and exhaust the room under the current debt ceiling noted by  the

Treasury Secretary. The staff forecast assumes that a  default will be averted,

Outlook

The staff has assumed that the federal funds rate will remain at 5-1/2 percent over the forecast period. Because financial markets are expecting easing of  at least 50 basis points over the next few quarters, intermediateand long-term yields could well back up from  their current levels under the assumed path for policy However any such backup likely would be  limited in size, especially at first, as market participants will continue to expect later easing until they see that the economic expansion is well sustained

without it

M2 is expected to expand a  bit faster this year than in 1995 owing to a  slight pickup in  nominal GDP growth and the smaller spread of  market interest rates over deposit rates occasioned by rate declines late last year As these effects subside, the growth of  M2 should edge down in 1997 With bond financing continuing to substitute for some bank loans to  businesses and with a  larger share of new  mortgages and consumer loans being securitized, bank lending is expected to grow at a  slower rate over the next two years than in 1995 As a  consequence, the financing of  bank credit with M3 liabilities should slow as well

Domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to grow around 4-1/2 percent this year and next a  bit slower than last year and near the pace projected for nominal GDP Federal borrowing is expected to  rise in  early 1996-owing primarily to the seasonal payout of tax refunds and payments for the earned income tax credit--before beginning to decline.

After a  merger-related bulge in borrowing by  nonfinancial firms in  the current quarter the growth of  business debt is projected to

slow over the forecast period. The slower debt growth is attributable to a  slowing of  inventory accumulation and some tapering down of  merger activity. With prices in  capital markets expected to give back some of  their gains, gross bond and equity offerings should ease from  their recent strong pace. Nonetheless, bond issuance by  nonfinancial corporations is likely to remain fairly robust while borrowing at banks and in  the commercial paper market slows, as firms continue to respond to relatively low  bond yields by substituting away from shorter-term debt With businesses experiencing little difficulty in  servicing debt and banks continuing to compete for loans, the availability of  bank financing is  not expected to  become a significant constraint over the forecast period. Net equity issuance will remain negative, but repurchases and merger-related share retirements are expected to  moderate as excess corporate liquidity ebbs and the realignment of targeted industries plays out

Despite an expected small backup in  mortgage interest rates, borrowing for home mortgages should continue apace Although mortgage refinancing has picked up recently, we do not expect a heavy cashing out of  accumulated equity that would add significantly to net mortgage debt formation. But lower monthly mortgage interest expense could make room for some additional household borrowing. With reduced growth in  durables purchases, we  expect consumer credit to  decelerate over the next two years. Although delinquency and charge-off rates on  installment debt are now  rising, they generally remain below levels associated with substantial financial stress in the past and seem unlikely to place much restraint on  overall household credit demand in  the near future. As signs of  weaker household financial positions become more evident banks will

probably tighten up  a  bit more on  loan supply, but not enough to put much of  a  dent in  debt expansion.

The decline in outstanding tax-exempt securities that began in 1994 is expected to  continue over the  next two years, but at a slower pace than in 1995 With a  smaller volume of  municipal securities either maturing or  becoming subject to calls for early redemption, retirements that have been refunded in advance as well as retirements out of concurrent refundings should decline. Issuance other than for refundings is expected to increase gradually over the period, reflecting a  rise in  construction expenditures by state and local governments.

CHANGE IN DEBT OF  THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL SECTORS 1 (Percent)

<!-- missing-text -->

Confidential FR Class II January 26, 1996

FLOW OF FUNDS PROJECTIONS: HIGHLIGHTS 1

(Billions of  dollars)

Rates------------

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Data after 1995:q3 are staff projections.
- 2.  Average debt levels in the  period (computed as the  average of period-end debt positions) divided by  nominal GDP.
- 3.  NIPA surplus less retirement funds plus consumption of fixed capital.
- 4.  Excludes government-insured mortgage pool securities.

2.6.4 FOF

Recent Developments

Since just before the December FOMC meeting, the weighted-average value of the dollar has risen about 3 percent. The dollar has appreciated 4 percent or so against the mark and the yen but has been unchanged on balance against the Canadian dollar.

Stagnating economic activity and recent and prospective monetary easing in Europe contributed to the dollar's rise against the mark and other European currencies. The Bundesbank reduced its discount and Lombard rates 50 basis points on December 14, and other European central banks reduced their money market intervention rates 25 to 50 basis points subsequently. German short-term rates have declined about 45 basis points over the period, somewhat more than U.S. rates. French short-term rates have fallen 60 basis points in the aftermath of the resolution of  the public-sector strikes, and Italian short-term rates have declined 70 basis points as Prime Minister Dini's political prospects improved somewhat with the passage of the 1996 budget in late December. Long-term rates in Germany have declined about 10 basis points on  balance, roughly the same as U.S rates while rates in some other European countries have declined somewhat more.

Market commentary has cited the narrowing of  Japan's trade and current account surpluses as the main factor behind the dollar's rise against the yen. Partly as a result of the weaker yen, prospects for Japanese growth have improved recently and Japanese long-term interest rates have risen 30 basis points; short-term rates have edged up.

The Bank of Canada eased its overnight lending rate 25 basis points on January 25, and three-month market rates have fallen 60 basis points since the December FOMC, while long-term rates have declined about 10 basis points.

Pressures  on  Mexican financial  markets have  eased during  the intermeeting period as  the  economy has  shown  signs  of  stabilizing. The peso  has  appreciated  about  4  percent  against the  dollar, short-term interest  rates have  declined about  10  percentage points to  37  percent,  and Mexican  stock prices  have  risen more  than 10 percent.

The  Desk did  not

intervene.

Recent data  point to  continued sluggish  output growth in Europe and  Canada,  but to  a modest  pickup  in  Japan. German GDP appears  to  have  fallen  in  the  fourth  quarter,  as  industrial production in October-November was below the  third-quarter  level. A cyclical  decline  in tax  revenues  and  rise  in  transfer  payments pushed the  1995  German budget deficit  above  3-1/2  percent  of GDP. In France,  data  on industrial  production and  consumer  spending,  as well  as  survey  evidence,  suggest that  output  remained weak in  the fourth quarter;  the  weakness  owed only  in part  to  the  public  sector strike in December. Industrial output  in the  United Kingdom stagnated  in  October-November,  although the  preliminary estimate of GDP  for the  fourth  quarter  showed  growth  remaining at  about  1-1/2 percent  at  an  annual  rate. Italian GDP  grew 8 percent  (annual rate) in  the  third  quarter, but much of  that  expansion was  accounted for by a surge  in  inventories that  probably was  reversed in  the  fourth quarter. Activity in  Canada appears to  have  been sluggish in the fourth quarter. Japan's  long-stalled economy showed  signs  of improvement  as  industrial  production, housing starts,  and machinery orders  advanced  strongly in  October and November.

Inflation  in the major foreign industrial countries  generally has  continued  to  be  subdued. Twelve-month CPI  inflation has remained  slightly negative  in Japan,  in the  range  of  1-1/2  to  2

percent in Germany, France, and Canada, and below 3 percent (excluding mortgage interest payments) in the United Kingdom. Italian inflation has receded a  bit from its November peak of 6  percent.

The U.S. nominal trade deficit in goods and services narrowed to  $8 billion in  October, compared with a  monthly average of a little more than $9 billion in the third quarter. Exports were up somewhat relative to the third quarter, while imports declined a bit. (Release of November data has been delayed by  the government shutdown.) Non-oil import prices declined moderately in October-November after having risen significantly earlier in the year.

Oil prices rose more than $2 per barrel in  December and early January, with the spot WTI price peaking at  nearly $20.50 per barrel on  January 8. Political uncertainties in Saudi Arabia and colder-than-normal weather in the northern hemisphere contributed to the rise. However, the spot price has fallen below $18 per barrel recently as temperatures returned to normal and as Iraq suggested a greater willingness to negotiate a reentry into the world oil market on  a restricted basis.

Outlook

We project that total foreign real GDP growth (weighted by shares in U.S. nonagricultural exports) will strengthen from about 2-1/2 percent at an annual rate in the second half of 1995 to 3-1/2 percent during 1996 and 1997. Although the outlook for average growth is about the same as in  the December Greenbook, prospects for some countries, particularly in Europe, have weakened, while those elsewhere, especially Japan, have strengthened. A  higher projected path for the dollar has led us to  mark down the trajectory for U.S. real net exports, which are now expected to  decline, compared with a flat forecast in December.

The dollar. We anticipate that the foreign exchange value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies will remain little changed on  balance from its recent levels throughout the forecast period. This path is more than 2  percent above the level in  the previous Greenbook, reflecting the appreciation of the dollar since then. An  upside risk to this outlook is that the dollar could appreciate if  market expectations of a  declining trajectory for U.S. interest rates are not realized, as the staff assumes. On the other hand, a  downside risk is that the yen could appreciate if the market's relatively optimistic outlook for additional narrowing of Japan's current account surplus moves closer to the staff's less sanguine view.

We expect that the CPI-adjusted value of the dollar in terms of the currencies of  key developing countries will depreciate at a moderate rate both this year and next--a bit faster than over the past two years. In particular, from current levels the peso is expected to appreciate in real terms over the forecast period, as its nominal exchange value against the dollar depreciates at a slower pace than the extent to  which Mexican inflation exceeds U.S. inflation.

Foreign G-7 countries. Growth of real GDP in  the major foreign industrial countries is projected to strengthen from about 3/4 percent, annual rate, during the fourth quarter to a  little more than 2-1/4 percent during 1996 and 1997. Downward revisions to the outlook for Europe and Canada have been largely offset by a  stronger outlook for recovery in  Japan.

We now estimate that real output in  Germany, France, and Italy declined in the fourth quarter, but  we expect that the recent and likely further near-term easing of  monetary conditions, among other factors, will stimulate expansions in the neighborhood of 2  to

2-1/2 percent this year and next (Q4/Q4).1 German growth should be boosted in  the near term by  tax cuts that took effect this month. Activity in France is expected to recover fairly quickly from strike-depressed levels in the fourth quarter, and Italian GDP should rebound following a  fourth-quarter inventory correction. Beyond the current quarter, we expect domestic demand in Europe to be spurred by lower interest rates while being restrained by additional fiscal consolidation. Our outlook for Germany in particular has been marked down somewhat because we  now anticipate a contractionary supplemental budget package in  response to recent shortfalls in revenue, notwithstanding that those revenue shortfalls are largely attributable to a  weaker economy.

Japanese real GDP appears to have expanded in the fourth quarter, and we expect that the growth rate will increase to 3 percent during 1996 before easing somewhat in 1997. This outlook is stronger than that in the December Greenbook, largely because of a  more robust projection for net exports, based on their recent strength and the yen's decline.

We expect Canadian GDP growth to pick up from a sluggish pace in the fourth quarter and to average a little less than 2-1/2 percent over the forecast period. Although fiscal consolidation will restrain growth, private demand should be stimulated by  the recent monetary easing.

The weaker outlook for Europe has led us to mark down inflation a  bit; we expect German and French CPI inflation to remain

at or  below 2  percent, U.K. (targeted) inflation to remain around 3 percent, and Italian inflation to recede to 4  percent by 1997. Stronger prospective activity in  Japan along with a  weaker yen leads us to project an  end to Japanese deflation, with the consumer price level roughly stable over the next two years.

This forecast incorporates the assumption that both short-term and long-term market interest rates in Europe and Canada will decline further during the next several months. The projected path of European interest rates this year has been revised down roughly 75 basis points on average. Japanese rates are assumed to remain little changed in the near term. By  the end of 1997, short-term rates should back up somewhat with the strengthening in the pace of foreign economic activity; long-term rates abroad should rise only marginally over that period.

Other countries. Real GDP in the major developing-country trading partners of the United States is projected to increase on average about 5-1/2 percent per year during 1996-97, compared with an estimate of 3  percent growth during 1995 (on a  Q4/Q4 basis) The pickup in growth in 1996-97 largely reflects an anticipated recovery in  Mexico.

Real GDP in  Mexico appears to have fallen almost 10 percent during 1995: recent monthly indicators suggest that after having declined sharply in the first half of the year, output expanded slightly in the third and fourth quarters. We project real GDP to grow by  4-5 percent per year during 1996-97, recovering to its prerecession level by early 1998.

The key  developing economies in Asia are expected to continue to grow rapidly, though somewhat more slowly than in 1995, when their output was stimulated by the appreciation of  the yen and some temporary monetary expansion that had occurred during 1994. Recent

monthly data point to a  deceleration of  output in several of these countries.

U.S. exports and imports of goods and services. Our outlook for the U.S. external sector has been affected both by changes in economic fundamentals and by  the shift to chain-weighted prices. We now project real net exports, measured in chained (1992) dollars, to decline by about 0.1 percent of GDP per year during 1996 and 1997. This is a  slightly weaker outlook than that in the December Greenbook, mostly because of the higher projected level of the dollar. The shift to chain-weighted price and volume measures did not affect the projected contribution of real net exports to U.S. GDP growth appreciably, but has substantially altered the projected paths of  both exports and imports in real terms.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: NIPA basis, chained (1992) dollars.

The shift to chain-weighted measures, by  itself, has raised the projected annual rates of growth of  prices and reduced the projected growth of  volumes of exports and imports of goods and

services by roughly 2-3 percentage points. Most of  these revisions reflect the much lower implicit weight commanded by computers on  a chain-weighted basis than on a  1987-dollar basis; computer prices fall just about as rapidly now as they did previously.

We expect the growth of real exports of goods and services to be stimulated by  the projected pickup in foreign GDP growth, especially during 1996, and to be depressed through 1997 by  the recent appreciation of the dollar. On  balance, this means export growth should increase a  bit from the 1995 pace during 1996 and then fall back to or below that pace in 1997.

Import growth will be stimulated a  bit during 1996 by  slightly faster U.S. GDP growth, a  recovery of oil imports from somewhat depressed levels in 1995, and the recent appreciation of the dollar.The expansion of imports should slow in 1997 as the effects of the appreciation recede. 2

Trade prices. Given movements in spot oil prices over the intermeeting period, we  have revised up the price of imported oil for the first quarter slightly, to just under $16 per barrel. Our longer-run projections for the WTI spot and the oil import prices remain at $18.50 per barrel and $16.00 per barrel, respectively. These projections assume that Iraq will not reenter the market until 1997.

Non-oil import prices (chain-weighted) are projected to edge down in 1996 as a  result of declining computer prices, the recent appreciation of the dollar, and flat commodity prices. In 1997 they should rise slightly as the effects of the appreciation cease. Prices of  nonagricultural exports are projected to rise slowly, in line with comparable U.S. producer prices.

<!-- missing-text -->

Nominal trade and current account balances. The nominal U.S. trade deficit on  goods and services is expected to average a  bit over $90 billion during 1996 and 1997, not far from its rate in recent months. Net investment income is projected to  deteriorate over the forecast period, contributing to a slight worsening of  the current account next year. The current account deficit is expected to be about $145 billion in 1996 and more than $150 billion in 1997, just under 2  percent of GDP in  both cases.

REAL GDP  AND  CONSUMER PRICES, SELECTED COUNTRIES, 1994-97 (Percent; quarterly change at an  annual rate except as  noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Annual values are  measured from Q4 to Q4.

- 1.  Not seasonally adjusted.
- 2.  CPI excluding mortgage interest payments; the mortgage interest payments was shown. Previously the CPI including targeted inflation rate.

Strictly Confidential (FR)  Class II-FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

Strictly Confidential (FR)  Class II-FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->