Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CLASS III FOMC

September

20 1996

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By the Staff Board of Governors of  the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Housing

Total private housing starts rose 4-1/2 percent in  August to 1.53 million units at an annual rate; total starts in July were revised up slightly. An 8-1/4 percent increase in  single-family starts more than accounted for the August increase. At a 1.24 million unit annual rate, single-family starts in  August reached the highest level recorded since early 1994. In  contrast, the signal from the permits data was not as robust: Permits for single-family houses were flat in  August and have moved lower since last spring, boosting the ratio of single-family starts to permits to 1.15, a relatively high level by  historical standards. As discussed in Part 2  of the Greenbook, other indicators of activity in  the singlefamily market for August also paint a less upbeat picture than the starts figures: Multifamily housing starts fell 9-1/2 percent last month, retracing most of  their July increase.

Private  Housing  Activity

(Millions  f  units;  easonally  adjusted  annual rate) o s

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. p Preliminary.  r  Revised.  n.a.  Not available.

Private  Housing  Starts

(Seasonally djusted  annual rate) a

<!-- missing-text -->

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations' M

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day quotes  xcept s  noted. e a
- 2. Average for  two-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest  o  date hown.  Last bservation  s he verage o ate nding  September  25,  1996 m p c t s o i t a t d e
- 3.  Secondary  market.
- 4.  Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t 1 a.m.  London time. f E d a 1
- 5. Most  recent  bservation  ased  on one-day  Thursday  quote nd  futures  arket ndex hanges. o b a m i c
- 6 Merrill  ynch Masterl  high  bond  index  composite. L
- 7.  Quotes  for eek ending  Friday revious  o  date hown. w p t s

Commercial Bank Credit

(Percentage  hange;  seasonally  djusted  nnual ate) c a a r 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. ncludes unicipal  ecurities, eign  overnment  securities, porate  onds, quities,  d  trading  ccount ssets. I m s for g cor b e an a a
- 3. xcludes  interbank  oans. E l
- 4.  Includes  stimates  f onsumer  loans hat  ave  been  securitized    banks  and  are till tstanding. e o c t h by s ou
- 5. ncludes  oans o  nonbank financial stitutions, ers,  tate  nd  local  overnments, anks  abroad, oreign I l t in farm s a g b f governments,  nd  all thers  ot lsewhere  lassified. o  includes  ease  inancing  eceivables. a o n e c Als l f r