Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CLASS  II

FOMC

March 21 1997

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By the Staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations' M

e

(Percent  xcept s  noted)

a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Average  for  two-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest   date hown.  Last bservation  s  the verage to ate or aintenance eriod nding m p c o s o i a d f m p e March 26,  1997.

- 4.  Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t 1 a.m.  London time. f E d a 1
- 5. Most  recent bservation  ased  on one-day  Thursday  quote nd  futures  arket  index  changes. o b a m
- 6.  Merrill  ynch  Master L II high-yield nd index  composite. bo
- 7.  Quotes  for eek ending riday revious o  date hown. w F p t s
- *  Figures ited re s  of he lose n  February . c a a t c o 4

U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services

In  January, the U.S. deficit in  trade in goods and services widened from the levels recorded in December and in the fourth quarter as a  whole; exports declined slightly and imports rose sharply.

The decrease in exports in  January was led by  a  drop in aircraft deliveries that is expected to  be  temporary and some small declines in exports of  both agricultural products and machinery (other than computers and semiconductors). Exports of computers moved up after a dip in December, and exports of semiconductors turned up after showing little change in the previous two months. Automotive exports to Canada picked up strongly, reflecting in part a  make-up of shipments delayed during the CAW and UAW strikes against GM  last fall. Despite the decline in total exports of goods and services in  January, the level was only 1-1/2 percent less than the very strong fourth-quarter average, with goods 2  percent lower and services 1  percent higher.

The sharp rise in imports in January was largely a rebound from strike-reduced levels in automotive shipments from Canada. The strikes against GM  had a greater effect on  automotive imports than automotive exports. Increases in imports were also recorded in January for oil (primarily an increase in quantity) and computers. The value of  imported computers (including accessories and parts) soared to a level in January that was 8  percent above its fourthquarter average. However, imports of consumer goods and foods posted small declines. Total imports of goods and services in January were 3-1/2 percent above the fourth-quarter average, with goods 4  percent higher and services 1  percent higher.

The January trade deficit was slightly larger than we expected, with almost all of  the surprise (compared with the estimate implicit in  the March Greenbook) in  machinery especially computers. The increase in computer imports in January (including accessories and parts) was much stronger than anticipated; computer exports were only slightly higher than anticipated in  the Greenbook. Exports of other machinery in January were somewhat lower than anticipated. After incorporating the data for January and updating our estimates for trade in  February and March, we now believe that the contribution of  net exports to GDP growth in  the current quarter

could be somewhat more negative than in  the Greenbook, perhaps $3 to 4  billion (annual rate) in real terms. However, more than half of the negative adjustment to  net exports would be offset by  higher domestic purchases of  capital goods, leaving a  negative adjustment to the rate of real GDP growth presented in the Greenbook for the current quarter of  one-tenth of  a  percentage point at most.

Prices of  Exports and Imports

In  February, prices of  U.S. non-oil imports increased slightly after posting a  moderate decrease in January. Most of the increase was attributable to higher prices for foods (especially coffee). Smaller rises were recorded for imported industrial supplies (the fourth consecutive month of increase) and consumer goods. For January-February combined, prices of  non-oil imports declined 1-1/4 percent at an annual rate.

The price of imported oil dropped significantly in February as deliveries of oil from Iraq and mild weather put downward pressure on prices. For January-February combined, the price of  imported oil dropped 5  percent at  an annual rate.

Prices of exports rose slightly in  February, primarily because of a  jump in  prices of agricultural products (primarily corn and soybeans). The increase in  prices of  agricultural exports was the largest since last May  and followed a  half-year of generally falling prices. Despite the increase in January, for January-February combined, agricultural export prices declined 1  percent at  an annual rate. Prices of nonagricultural exports decreased marginally in February following two months of small increases. For JanuaryFebruary combined, prices of  nonagricultural exports rose 1/2 percent at an  annual rate, the same rate of increase recorded in the fourth quarter.

Trade in  Goods and  Services: Summary (in  billions of  dollars, seasonally adjusted)

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1/ U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of  the Census and  Bureau of Economic Analysis, BOP valuation.
- */  In billions of chained (1992) dollars.
- Note: Details may  not  add to  totals because of rounding.

B.1.b.

DETAILS OF GOODS AND  SERVICES: LEVELS (Millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, monthly press release (FT-900).

TABLE 3

DETAILS OF  GOODS AND SERVICES: DOLLAR CHANGES (Millions of  dollars, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, monthly press release (FT-900).

TABLE 4

DETAILS OF GOODS AND SERVICES: PERCENT CHANGES (Percent change from previous period)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, monthly press  release  FT-900). (

B.4.a.

PRICES OF MERCHANDISE EXPORTS AND IMPORTS

(percent change from previous period)

<!-- missing-text -->

e-Average of first two months of quarter.

I

0