Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CLASS

III

FOMC

June 27, 1997

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND  FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of  Governors of  the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Real GDP: 1997:Q1

As expected, the BEA's final estimate of real GDP for the first quarter changed little from the preliminary estimate. Relative to the staff expectations shown in Part 2, the final estimate indicated somewhat smaller downward revisions to business equipment spending and to  nonfarm inventory accumulation. This report would not lead us  to  materially alter our current-quarter forecast of real output.

<!-- missing-text -->

The final report also included revised estimates of  corporate profits for the first quarter. Corporate profits (with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments) now are reported to have risen $42.4 billion from the fourth-quarter level. This figure represents a  downward revision of about $4  billion from the preliminary release. The downward revision occurred in  the foreign component of  profits; domestic profits were revised up slightly. The profit share of GNP (excluding Federal Reserve banks) was 8.8 percent in the first quarter, up from 8.4 percent in  the fourth quarter. 1

Real gross domestic income (GDI)--the output of  the economy measured from the income side of  the national accounts--increased 5.9 percent at an  annual rate in  the first quarter, the same as GDP. Over the past four quarters, however, real GDI has increased 4.7 percent, compared with real GDP growth of  4.1 percent. Michigan (SRC) Survey of Consumer Attitudes

According to the final report, the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment climbed 1.3 percentage points in  June to an historical high; the preliminary report had shown only a  small increase (0.2 percentage point). Respondents had highly favorable assessments of future business conditions and of their current financial situation relative to last year. While households were less optimistic about their personal financial situation over the coming year, that index remains at a  high level. Similarly, appraisals of  buying conditions for large household appliances fell back in June, but remained at a  highly favorable level.

Among the questions not included in the overall index, the index of expected unemployment change over the next 12 months, which has been on a  downtrend for more than a  year, edged down in  June. The index of  car buying conditions rose to its highest level since early 1994, reflecting favorable views concerning price discounts and interest rates. However, appraisals of  home buying conditions were unchanged in June as  more positive views on  home prices were offset by  more negative views of current mortgage rates. Households' willingness to use credit to  finance a  major purchase fell back somewhat in  June after a  jump in  May, while their willingness to use savings rose.

The  mean of expected inflation over the next 12 months edged down 0.2 percentage point to 3.5 percent in June and has changed little, on  balance, of  the past four months. The mean and  median of expected inflation over the next five to  ten years both edged up 0.1 percentage point to 3.9 and 3.1 percent, respectively in  June.

Real Gross  Domestic  Product and  Related Items

(Percent change  from  previous period at  compound annual  rates;

based  on seasonally adjusted data,  chain-type indexes)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1, Level, illions   chain  (1992)  dollars. b of
- 2. Annual average.
- 3. With inventory aluation djustment  (IVA) and capital  onsumption adjustment  (CCAdj), level,  illions    dollars. v a c b of
- 4. Economic  profits  s a share of  nominal GNP. a

UNIVERSITY OF  MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF  CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not  seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and  buying conditions are the  percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the  percent reporting 'bad  times' (or  'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is  the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to  fall, plus 100.

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations M 1

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day  quotes xcept s  noted. e a
- 2. Average  for wo-week reserve  aintenance eriod losest   date  shown.  Last bservation   the verage or aintenance eriod nding  June  25, t m p c o o is a f m p e 1997.
- 3.  Secondary  market.
- 4. Bid  rates  or urodollar posits  t  11 a.m. ondon time. f E de a L
- 5. Most recent bservation sed  on one-day  Thursday  quote nd  futures  arket  index hanges. o ba a m c
- 6.  Merrill  ynch Master  II igh-yield nd index  composite. L h bo
- 7. Quotes  for eek ending  Friday revious  o ate hown. w p t d s
- *  Figures ited re  as  of he lose n  May c a t c o 19, 1997.