Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Part 2

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Recent  Developments

December  11,  1997

Confidential  FR) ( Class III OMC F

December 11, 1997

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared for he  Federal  Open  Market Committee t

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Labor market indicators point to continued strong growth of economic activity in recent months. Households evidently have maintained their upbeat attitudes through the recent storms in  world equity markets, and growth in  real consumer spending remained healthy through November; household confidence has been evident in the market for homes as well. Trends in capital goods orders have remained quite positive, but growth in real fixed investment this quarter appears unlikely to approach the extraordinary pace of  the previous six  months. Although labor markets continue to  be tight and to exert upward pressure on  wages, sizable gains in productivity have thus far kept unit labor costs in check. Price inflation has remained low and stable.

Labor Market Developments

Hiring was very brisk in  the first two months of  the fourth quarter. Payroll employment rose about 350,000 on average over October and November--well above the average monthly pace of  the first three quarters of the year. With labor force particpation relatively flat over the second half of  the year, the recent surge in employment has caused the unemployment rate to  fall to 4.6 percent, its lowest level in almost twenty-five years.

Aggregate hours of production or nonsupervisory workers shot up 1.1 percent in  November, as  the average workweek jumped more than a quarter of an  hour to a  high 34.8 hours. Even assuming some dropback in  December, the increase in  hours for the fourth quarter as a  whole would be  close to  4  percent at  an  annual rate.

Private payroll employment rose 409,000 in  November after recording a  gain of 257,000 in  October. For November, payroll increases were widespread across sectors. The service industry accounted for 180,000 of  the gain, with temporary help supply contributing almost a  third of  that increase. Despite anecdotal reports that retailers were having difficulty hiring, that industry posted its largest employment gain in  nearly three years. Employment in  the manufacturing sector increased 44,000 in  November; over the past twelve months, manufacturing payrolls have expanded nearly 200,000.

The November household survey painted a  similar picture of labor market strength. Employment jumped 671,000 after a  period of relatively weak growth. In contrast to anectotal reports that firms

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Average change  from  final  onth  of m preceding period  to final month of period indicated.

- 1. Survey of establishments.
- 2.  Survey of  households.
- 3.  Annual data  are  percent hange from c Q4 to Q4. Quarterly  ata  are  percent hange from preceding eriod d c p
- at  an annual  rate.  Monthly data  are  percent hange from preceding onth. c m

<!-- missing-text -->

were hiring an unusually large number of part-time workers for the holiday season, part-time employment, for both noneconomic and economic reasons, actually fell in  November. The longer-term decline in  part-time employment for economic reasons is consistent with reports that firms are increasingly switching workers from partto full-time employment.

The labor force participation rate rebounded in  November to 67.1 percent--in line with the average over the first three quarters of the year. The fraction of  the population not in  the labor force but wanting jobs has fluctuated at a  low level in  recent months, which continues to suggest that the participation rate has little upside potential. Indeed, anecdotal reports indicate severe shortages of  workers in some fields--perhaps most notably, information technology. The problem of availability is reported to be  particularly troublesome for small business; the proportion of companies reporting to the National Federation of Independent Business that positions are hard to  fill has been at  a  high level in the  past several months.

Other indicators reinforce the image of  a  strong labor market in  the fourth quarter. Initial claims for  unemployment insurance stayed low into early December. The Manpower, Inc., survey of  net hiring strength for the first quarter of next year remained at  a high level. 1 Household perceptions of  labor market conditions also continue to  be  very positive, according to the Michigan and Conference Board surveys.

Growth in output per hour in  the nonfarm business sector rose 4.1 percent at an  annual rate in the third quarter. Over the four quarters ending in 1997:Q3, nonfarm business productivity advanced 2.4 percent, the highest rate recorded in  almost five years. Thirdquarter gains in labor productivity were particularly large in  the manufacturing sector, in  which productivity jumped 9.3 percent at an annual rate, and in the nonfinancial corporate sector, in  which productivity climbed 6.7 percent at an  annual rate.

The sharp rise in nonfarm business productivity in the third quarter was partly due to an especially large drop in the hours of the self-employed and of  unpaid family workers. The drop in such hours significantly reduced the measure of all person-hours used by

Labor Market  Indicators

Initial aims  for  Unemployment Cl Insurance

<!-- missing-text -->

Companies

Reporting Positions

Net Hiring  Strength

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Expected Change  in  Unemployment minus percentage  expecting

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Percentage expecting

"more"

plus 100.

"less"

Current  Job Availability

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Labor Force  Participation ate R

<!-- missing-text -->

Employed Part Time

<!-- missing-text -->

staff.

LABOR PRODUCTIVITY

AND  COSTS

(Percent change from  preceding period at compound annual rate; based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

change; based on  seasonally djusted a data)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Uses not  seasonally  djusted  ata. a d

BLS to calculate output per  hour. 2 Because hours for the selfemployed and for unpaid family workers are so erratic, a productivity measure constructed using employee hours may provide a better signal of  underlying productivity growth. By this measure, output per hour rose 2.3 percent at an annual rate in  the third quarter. Although this figure is smaller than the standard BLS measure using the hours of  all persons, it  still represents a  solid gain in  productivity relative to its longer-run trend.

The hours of  the self-employed and of  unpaid family workers leapt 1.2 percent in November after falling 0.7 percent in  October. Unless hours in  this category surge in  December, the net effect on the growth of total hours in  the fourth quarter still will be somewhat negative, although much less so than last quarter. If hours in  this category were to  move back up  further over the next few quarters, that rise would tend to damp the pace of  productivity growth measured using the hours of  all persons.

Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose at a 3 3.9 percent annual rate in the third quarter. Over the past four quarters, compensation per  hour grew 3.8 percent; this marks a 1 percentage point acceleration in  hourly compensation over the past two years. However, the pickup in  productivity growth has held unit labor costs in  check; for the four quarters ended with 1997:Q3, unit labor costs grew only 1.3 percent.

Average hourly earnings provide the first reading of labor costs this quarter. In  October and November, earnings rose 0.4 percent and 0.6 percent respectively. Over the past twelve months, average hourly earnings rose 4.3 percent, up from the 3.6 percent increase recorded over the previous twelve-month period. The jump in average hourly earnings in  November may  be  exaggerated somewhat owing to some potential reporting problems the BLS has identified that tend to lead to relatively large increases in  hourly earnings in months with fewer working days and small increases in

GROWTH IN  SELECTED COMPONENTS OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION (Percent change from preceding comparable period)

<!-- missing-text -->

1. From the final quarter of  the  previous period to  the final quarter of  the period indicated.

<!-- missing-text -->

4 months with more. That aside, the remaining acceleration looks to  be  not only a  response to the jump in  the  minimum wage on September 1, but also some bidding up of wages in  a  tight labor market.

Industrial Production

Production worker hours and available physical product data suggest that industrial production rose sharply in  November. A substantial increase in  motor vehicle assemblies and related activity was one important component of  November's advance. Production of information processing equipment and semiconductors appears again to  have contributed significantly to the overall IP gain, whereas utilities output appears to  have fallen following two strong months of  growth.

Motor vehicle assemblies rose 5  percent in  November; both auto and truck assemblies increased, together contributing about 0.1 percentage point to the rise in industrial production. Schedules for December call for production to drop to 12.2 million units at  an  annual rate.

Manufacturing production worker hours excluding motor vehicles and parts (FRB  seasonals) rose 0.8 percent in  November. Adding normal productivity gains and incorporating the available physical product data, output in  manufacturing outside of  the motor vehicles and parts sector likely soared in  November. The increase in  hours was widespread across industries; particularly notable were increases in industrial machinery and equipment, electrical equipment (including semiconductors), and food. Among industries

NEW ORDERS FOR  DURABLE GOODS (Percent change from  preceding period, sesonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Orders excluding defense capital goods, nondefense aircraft, and  motor vehicle parts.
- 2.  Nominal adjusted durable goods orders were split into two  components, computers and  all other. These components were deflated and then aggregated in a  chainweighted fashion.

Indicators  f  Future Production: o New Orders  Indexes

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Indexes above 50 indicate  rders  are  increasing,  nd indexes  below o a 50 indicate  rders  are  decreasing. o

for which weekly physical product data are available, appliances, steel, and lumber production showed small gains while petroleum refining fell in  November.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may  not sum to  totals because of  rounding.

Production worker hours in  the commercial aircraft industry (FRB seasonals) rose 2.4 percent in November, rebounding from October's 0.6 percent decline. October's falloff coincided with Boeing's shutdown of segments of  the 747 production line because of parts shortages and other production difficulties. In  November, the 747 line was brought back up, but the 737 production line was interrupted, also largely because of  parts shortages. Both lines were up in  early December, and Boeing plans to increase its assembly rate through the second quarter of  next year.

Indicators of  future production continue to  point to  a deceleration in IP in the months ahead: One important contibutor will be  the scheduled slowdown in  motor vehicle production. The staff's estimate of  real adjusted durable goods orders fell 2.2 percent in  October, but this decrease followed a  very strong third quarter; on balance, the recent orders picture points to moderate growth in  the near term. Both the National Association of Purchasing Managers and the Dun and Bradstreet Manufacturing Survey indexes of  new orders are off  a  bit from earlier highs, but they remain at favorable levels.

The staff recently published the annual revison of industrial production and capacity utilization. The revision incorporated information from the 1995 Annual Survey of  Manufactures and the 1996 Survey of Plant Capacity, as  well as updated monthly source data and new information on prices. The cumulative revision places the level of the production index in 1997:Q3 about 3  percent above the

-

Revised

Previous

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Industrial  oduction Pr

Percent change from four  quarters arlier

e

--

Q3  -

10

4

6

4

2

2

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Capacity Utilization Manufacturing

<!-- missing-text -->

previously published level for the third quarter. The largest upward revisions to growth were in  1994 and 1995. The index, nevertheless, continues to show some slowing in growth in the first half of 1995 after a  surge in 1994. Growth still accelerates in 1996 and 1997, even though upward revisions averaged only about 1/4 percentage point in  those years. The largest components of  the upward revision came in the semiconductor and communications equipment industries, but output elsewhere, especially other durable manufacturing, was boosted as well.

Capacity utilization in  manufacturing in  the third quarter of this year was revised to 81.6 percent, 1-1/2 percentage points less than previously reported. The revised production indexes and information from the 1996 Survey of Plant Capacity, which provided industry utilization rates for the fourth quarters of 1995 and 1996, implied that manufacturing capacity growth was stronger than previously estimated. The revised annual rate of capacity growth in manufacturing exceeds 5  percent since 1995. Although a  substantial portion of  the upward revision in  capacity growth occurred in  the computer industry, the upward revision was not limited to hightechnology industries.

With the revision, the utilization rate in  manufacturing since 1995 has been at, or  a  bit below, its long-term average. Even  more than the earlier figures, the revised ones show that an acceleration in  the growth of  capacity in  recent years has accommodated this lengthy expansion without substantial pressures on  manufacturers' productive capability.

Personal Income and Consumption

Total nominal retail sales turned up 0.2 percent in  November, according to Census's advance report. Spending in  the retail control category, which excludes sales at  automotive dealers and at building material and supply stores, rose 0.3 percent last month; however, the similar-sized gains previously reported for September and October were cut in  half. Nominal sales at apparel and at furniture and appliance stores turned up sharply in  November, but sales at general merchandisers were little changed. This report, together with available information on  prices, suggests that real PCE for goods excluding motor vehicles in  October and November was about 0.2 percent higher than the average level in 1997:Q3 (not at an annual rate).

<!-- missing-text -->

1.  Total retail sales less building material and supply stores and automotive dealers, except auto and home supply stores.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Derived from  BEA's advance estimates.

1.  Derived from  billions of  chained (1992) dollars.

(Percent  change from the preceding  period)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  The weather index  is he  deviation t in the  number  of heating and cooling egree days in   month  from that onth's  average over  the  past d a m five ears. y

Consumer Surveys

Consumer  Sentiment

<!-- missing-text -->

Current  Conditions

<!-- missing-text -->

Expected Conditions

<!-- missing-text -->

Real spending on  services rose 0.6 percent in  October, the latest month for which data are available. Expenditures on energy services jumped 2.2 percent in  October (on  a  seasonally adjusted basis), as temperatures returned to normal after a  relatively warm September. According to national weather data, temperatures in November ran a  bit below normal, pointing to  another rise in energy spending last month. Outlays for non-energy services increased 0.5 percent in October, boosted by  a  surge in  expenditures on brokerage services and solid gains in spending in other categories. Trading volumes on  major U.S. exchanges--an indicator used by  the BEA  when constructing its monthly estimates of  PCE for brokerage services--dropped back in  November, making a  decline in spending on brokerage services that month highly likely.

Estimates of personal income are available only through October. In  that month, real disposable personal income rose 0.3 percent, boosted by  a  hefty gain in private wage and salary disbursements. Aggregate hours worked and average hourly earnings (even after adjusting for reporting problems) made substantial gains in  November, suggesting that private wage and salary disbursements will show another large increase for the month.

Readings of consumer sentiment for November continued to show that households have euphoric views of  economic conditions. The Michigan index rose to a  historical high in  November, while the Conference Board index climbed back to the upper end of the very favorable range that has prevailed since last May. In  both the Michigan and Conference Board surveys, respondents' views of current conditions improved in  November, while appraisals of  expected conditions held steady. On  balance, the strong economic outlook as seen from  Main Street seemed to  be  unaffected by  the recent turbulence on  Wall Street and in financial markets abroad: In  last month's Michigan survey, respondents reported more favorable views of their personal financial situations and of  buying conditions for large household items, and in  the Conference Board survey, respondents' appraisals of  current job availability and current business conditions strengthened further last month.

Motor Vehicles

Adjusted for shifts in reporting periods, sales of  new  light motor vehicles rose to 15.1 million units (annual rate) in  November, more than retracing the dip in sales in October. Sales at the Big Three rose 500,000 units, accounting for nearly all of the increase.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may of trucks and imported aautos not sum  to  totals because of  rounding. Data on  sales for the most recent month are  preliminary.

- 1.  Excludes the estimated effect of  automakers' changes in  reporting periods.
- 2.  Excludes some vehicles produced in  Canada that the industry classifies as imports

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  FRB  staff  stimate

e

The improvement appears to have been the result of increased deliveries to  consumers; confidential company data from both GM  and Ford indicate that their fleet sales declined last month. A source at GM  also reported that delays in rail deliveries were no longer a factor holding down sales in  November.

Several factors are  working to sustain healthy sales of  motor vehicles to consumers. In  November, attitudes regarding car-buying conditions remained in  the middle of  the favorable range seen over the past year, according to the Michigan SRC survey. The November reading on  buying plans from the Conference Board ticked down but is still at a  level consistent with a  solid sales pace. In part, these opinions have been bolstered by  the competitive pricing among major producers. Sales incentives are still sizable and are expected to remain high over the near term. Despite solid sales, Toyota has put in place modest incentives to ensure that the Camry does not lose its number 1  sales position to  the new  Honda Accord.

Housing Markets

The housing sector has remained strong in  the fourth quarter. Housing starts rose to 1.53 million units (annual rate) in October, as a  sharp rise in  multifamily construction outweighed a  decline in single-family starts.

Although starts of  single-family units fell back after having reached a  high level in September, the October pace of 1.14 million units was equal to  the third-quarter average. Adjusted permit issuance for single-family units strengthened in October to a  level that suggests that the starts figure may  understate the pace of construction activity.

The fundamentals of  demand for single-family housing have shown continued strength in recent months: Gains in employment and income have remained sizable, and mortgage rates have declined further. Although sales of new  homes slipped a  bit in  October, they remained high, and homebuilders' ratings of new  home sales remained quite positive through early November. Existing home sales, which (because they are recorded predominantly at the closing rather than at  the signing of  the contract) respond to changing market conditions somewhat less rapidly than new home sales, rose in October to another high for the series. The SRC index of  consumer attitudes toward homebuying conditions, when adjusted for seasonal variation, increased in  November to the most favorable reading in three and one-half years. Applications for mortgages to finance

Private ousing Activity H (Millions  f  units;  easonally djusted nnual rate) o s a a

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  p Preliminary,  r  Revised.  n.a.  Not available.

Private ousing Starts H

(Seasonally djusted  annual rate) a

<!-- missing-text -->

Indicators  of  Housing Demand

(Seasonally djusted; RB  seasonals) a F

Builders'  ating  of  New R Home Sales

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer  Homebuying Attitudes

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

BUSINESS CAPITAL SPENDING INDICATORS (Percent change from preceding comparable period; based on  seasonally adjusted data, in  current dollars)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. From the Current Industrial Report "Civil Aircraft and  Aircraft Engines." Monthly data are seasonally adjusted using FRB seasonal factors constrained to BEA  quarterly seasonal factors. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted using BEA  seasonal factors.
- 2.  Percent change of  number of  rigs in  use, seasonally adjusted.
- 3. Producers' durable equipment excluding office and  computing, communications, motor vehicles, and  aircraft and  parts.

n.a.

Not  available.

home purchases have risen to the highest point in  the eight-year history of the series.

Multifamily housing starts soared in October to 386,000 units, which is the highest monthly estimate in nearly eight years. However, permit issuance for multifamily structures was little changed, raising doubts about the sustainability of  this high level of  starts. The vacancy rate for multifamily rental units in the third quarter was below its year-earlier level for the fourth consecutive quarter, indicating that the vacant stock is  diminishing slowly even though, at 9.2 percent, it remains relatively high.

Business Fixed Investment

Growth of real business fixed investment appears to be moderating from the torrid pace registered in  the second and third quarters. Nonetheless, investment fundamentals appear to  be strong: Business output growth has been robust, corporate cash flow is healthy, and the real user cost-of-capital--especially for computing equipment--remains low.

Nominal shipments of office and computing equipment fell 1.8 percent in October but remained at a  high level. With prices of personal computers continuing to fall rapidly, real spending on office and computing equipment ought to post a  solid gain in the fourth quarter. Notably, Intel recently announced a  restructuring of its microprocessor business to  better enable it  to reduce costs and match the prices charged by  its competitors. The lukewarm acceptance in the marketplace of  the top-of-the-line Pentium II chip also makes price reductions likely.

Shipments of  communications equipment edged up  in October after posting strong gains in  the third quarter. This sector has grown rapidly this year, as Internet usage and telecommunications deregulation have led to the expansion of local phone networks. Moreover, price declines are expected this quarter, pointing to a healthy gain in real outlays.

In  contrast to the high-tech sector, expenditures on transportation equipment appear likely to  be a  drag on  producers' durable equipment in the fourth quarter. Real domestic spending on aircraft is likely to fall in  the fourth quarter because of production disruptions at Boeing. Business demand for heavy trucks was exceptionally robust in  October, when sales surged to 454,000 units (annual rate)--noticeably above the strong third-quarter pace--and sales in  November remained close to  that high level.

Orders  and  Shipments of  Nondefense Capital  Goods

Office and Computing  Equipment

<!-- missing-text -->

Communications  Equipment

<!-- missing-text -->

Other  Equipment  (Excluding ircraft,  mputing, and Communications A Co Equipment)

<!-- missing-text -->

However, with fleet sales of light motor vehicles in October and November below their third-quarter rate, overall business spending on  vehicles is likely to decline this quarter.

New  orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft and high-tech equipment fell 1.6 percent in October, but they continue to run  well ahead of shipments. Shipments in  this category fell 0.9 percent in  October. Much of  the drop was driven by  a  sharp decline in shipments of railroad equipment, which tend to  be  highly erratic. Excluding railroad equipment, shipments in  this category fell 0.2 percent.

Spending on  nonresidential structures is on  track to end the year lower than it started, despite some strong fundamentals. Commercial real estate prices, as indicated by  the National Real Estate Price Index, have continued to  move up this year, while vacancy rates have fallen because of  robust demand for space. The FDIC real estate survey of senior examiners and asset managers also reports a  very upbeat assessment of the strength of the commercial market. Nonetheless, private nonresidential construction put-inplace fell 1.1 percent in  October after having declined 0.5 percent in September. These data, coupled with information on construction contracts, point to a  decrease in outlays on structures in  the current quarter.

Business Inventories

On  a  book-value basis, manufacturers' inventories increased at a  $24 billion annual rate in  October, a  touch faster than the average rate for the third quarter. With shipments declining 0.1 percent, the inventory-shipments ratio for all manufacturing ticked up to 1.35 months, the same as its average value for the third quarter.

Inventories of  durable goods increased at a  $10 billion annual rate in  October, boosted by  another large increase in stocks of aircraft and parts, which were up $6  billion (annual rate). The inventory-shipments ratio for aircraft and parts rose sharply, to 4.7, an increase most likely associated with Boeing's recent difficulties in  completing aircraft. Inventories of  nondurable goods increased at  a  $14 billion annual rate in October, driven by another large buildup in  inventories of chemicals, which expanded at a  $7  billion annual rate. Shipments of  nondurable goods advanced 0.8 percent in  October, keeping the inventory-sales ratio flat at 1.12 months.

Nonresidential  Construction and  Contracts

(Six-month moving average)

<!-- missing-text -->

Nonresidential Construction Indicators

Vacancy Rates

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

FDIC Survey

<!-- missing-text -->

Diffusion  index

CHANGES IN MANUFACTURING AND  TRADE INVENTORIES

(Billions of  dollars at annual rates;

based on seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

(Months' supply, based on  Census book-value data, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. October 1997 ratios ratios for retail trade. for  manufacturing and  wholesale; September 1997

Inventory-Sales Ratios,  by Major Sector

Manufacturing

(Book  value)

<!-- missing-text -->

Wholesale Excluding  Motor Vehicles

<!-- missing-text -->

Retail

<!-- missing-text -->

Outlays

Deposit

Spectrum

Other

Receipts

1996

1997

139.5

-. 1

.0

139.6

99.7

150.5

-. 4

.0

150.9

114.9

October

Nov.95-

Oct.96

1581.4

-7.3

-. 3

1589.0

1456.7

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS

(Unified basis; billions of  dollars)

12-month

Nov.96-

Oct.97

1612.3

-14.6

-11.0

1638.0

1594.2

totals

Dollar change

30.9

-7.3

-10.7

48.9

137.5

Percent change

2.0

n.a.

n.a.

3.1

9.4

Deficit

(+)

39.8

35.6

124.7

18.1

-106.6

-85.5

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may  not sum to  totals because of rounding.

insurance auction

(DI)

(SA)

In  wholesale trade, stocks continued to  build up at a  moderate pace in October. Excluding motor vehicles, wholesale inventories increased $21 billion (annual rate) in  October, about $7  billion more than the average rate for the third quarter. A  surge in  the accumulation of stocks of farm products ($14 billion, annual rate) accounted for  much of the overall rise. This stockbuilding most likely was the result of  the timing of  this year's harvest, which, at the end of  October, had moved ahead at  an  unusually rapid pace. Changes in  wholesale stocks of farm products in the coming months are likely to  be  much smaller. With sales flat in  October, the inventory-sales ratio for wholesale trade excluding motor vehicles ticked up to 1.24 months, extending its upward trend.

In  retail trade, stocks of non-auto inventories increased $29 billion (annual rate) in  book-value terms in September, reversing August's large decline. The inventory buildup was most notable in  nondurable goods, which grew $17 billion (annual rate), the largest increase since July of  last year.

Federal Government

The October Monthly Treasury Statement reported continued shrinkage in the unified deficit. Adjusted for payment timing shifts, and excluding deposit insurance and spectrum auction proceeds, the October deficit fell $12 billion from last year's level. Adjusted outlays increased only 2-1/2 percent, while receipts rose 15 percent. Withheld individual income taxes and withheld social insurance taxes (FICA), which accounted for 80 percent of  total receipts in  October, were up 11 percent from a year ago.

The Congress and the President have approved all thirteen regular appropriations bills funding discretionary government programs in  fiscal year 1998. According to CBO, new  budget authority for these programs in fiscal 1998 will increase $24 billion (5  percent) from the fiscal 1997 level. Relative to CBO's September estimates for discretionary outlays in  fiscal 1997, outlays in  fiscal 1998 are projected to rise only $6  billion (1  percent) because some of the increase in  new  budget authority-notably that for defense procurement and subsidized housing--will be spent in later years. CBO estimates that defense and nondefense discretionary outlays in fiscal 1998 will be  about equal to the discretionary outlay caps legislated in  the Budget Enforcement Act

<!-- missing-text -->

- 3.  Relative importance weight for intermediate materials, December 1996.
- 4.  Relative importance weight for crude materials, December 1996.

of 1997. Meeting the spending caps in  future fiscal years will be increasingly difficult because the caps increase less than $4  billion in 1999 and in 2000 and then stay about flat in 2001 and 2002.

State and Local Governments

Spending by state and local governments in the first part of the fourth quarter apparently was fairly subdued. Employment edged down 2,000 in  November following an  upward-revised increase of 21,000 the month before. These figures are  well below the average monthly advance of  28,000 over the first nine months of the year. Real construction spending rose 0.6 percent in October, to a  level slightly below the third-quarter average; much of the strength was in construction of educational facilities, while building of highways and water supply systems declined.

Prices

The incoming news on price inflation has remained favorable. The consumer price index rose 0.2 percent in October, the same rate of  increase recorded in each of  the past three months. Over the past twelve months, consumer prices have risen 2.1 percent, down from a  3.0 percent increase over the year-earlier period. The favorable labor cost environment, weak import prices, declining inflation expectations, and modest energy price increases have all contributed to this deceleration in the CPI.

The CPI for energy was little changed in  October after having risen 3  percent over the preceding two months. Retail gasoline prices edged off in October after having risen sharply earlier partly because of a  strong end-of-summer driving season. Natural gas prices rose 2.4 percent in  October after a  similar increase in September as  demand was pushed up by  higher prices for some substitute fuels and rail supply disruptions forced some electric utilities to substitute gas for coal. Over the past twelve months, energy prices have risen only 0.9 percent, down considerably from the 5-3/4 percent increase in  the year-earlier period.

Retail food prices rose 0.2 percent in October, close to  their average rate of increase over the past few  months. The CPI for food away from home was up just 0.1 percent in  October; although wages at eating and drinking establishments jumped in September with the rise in  the minimum wage, the pass-through of  higher wage costs into food prices has thus far been only modest. Overall, the CPI for food was up 1.8 percent over the twelve months ended in October, more than

BROAD MEASURES OF INFLATION (Four-quarter percent change)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Excluding housing

SURVEYS OF (CPI) INFLATION EXPECTATIONS (Percent)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  CPI; percent change from  the  same  period in  the preceding year.
- 2. Average increase for  responses to  the question: By  about what  percent do you expect prices (CPI) to go  up, on  the  average, during the next 12  months?
- 3.  Median increase for  responses to the question above.
- 4.  Compiled by  the Federal Reserve Bank  of  Philadelphia.

2  percentage points less than the increase over the preceding twelve months. Although recent data on farm commodity prices suggest that retail food prices could blip up in  the very near term, the increases appear likely to  be concentrated in  categories--such as eggs and fresh vegetables--in which price spurts typically are short-lived.

For items other than food and energy, consumer prices rose 0.2 percent in October, continuing a  string of small increases. On a  twelve-month-change basis, the core CPI was up 2.3 percent in October, down 1/4 percentage point from the pace registered a  year earlier.5 Prices of  both goods and services other than food and energy registered some deceleration over the past year. Among goods, falling import prices have been an important restraining influence on  prices in recent years. This restraint has been most clearly evident in  the prices of new  motor vehicles, which declined slightly over the twelve months ended in  October after having risen more than 2  percent over the preceding year. (The deceleration in new  and used auto prices accounts for  most of  the 1/4 percentage point deceleration in  the core CPI over the last year.) The pace of price increases of  many other goods also was lower over the past year; apparel was one notable exception, having picked up about 2  percentage points. Among services other than energy, price increases slowed for many items, including medical care and auto finance charges.

Broad expenditure price measures other than the CPI also slowed over the past year. Core PCE prices continued to  decelerate over the past year, about in line with the core CPI over the past two years. Among product prices, the pace of increase in  the GDP chain price measure has moved down about 1/2 percentage point over the past four quarters.

Inflation expectations as  measured by  the Michigan SRC index have also come down over the past year, although they ticked back up a  bit in  November. In  the third quarter of  this year, one-yearahead median expectations were about 1/4 percentage point lower than a  year earlier, while mean expectations were about 3/4 percentage point lower. And ten-year-ahead mean inflation expectations of professional forecasters surveyed by  the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia were down 0.3 percentage point from a  year ago.

SPOT PRICES OF  SELECTED COMMODITIES

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Week  of  the  November Greenbook.

The PPI for capital equipment edged down in October and stood about unchanged from its year-earlier level, compared with an increase of  0.7 percent over the previous twelve months. In October, the capital goods index was held down by  a  drop in truck prices. However, computer prices reportedly were unchanged in October after having fallen on average nearly 2  percent per month so far this year.

Prices at earlier stages of processing have also been restrained lately. The PPI for core intermediate materials only edged up in October, and the index for core crude materials rebounded only partially from a  decline in September.

In addition, price indexes for industrial commodities have plummeted since the time of  the last Greenbook. The Journal of Commerce industrial price index, in  which price changes are "standardized" to take account of  historical volatility, has dropped about 5  percent since early November, and  the CRB price index for spot industrials has fallen about 6-1/2 percent. Declines over this period have been widespread among metals, textiles, and other industrial inputs such as  hides and rubber. Prices of  food commodities--and the indexes in  which these commodities are given large weight--also are down on  balance since early November, but  by a  much smaller amount than the industrial price measures.

Commodity Price Measures

Journal  f  Commerce  Index o

<!-- missing-text -->

KR-CRB Spot Industrials

<!-- missing-text -->

KR-CRB Futures

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Weekly data, Tuesdays. Vertical  ines n small  panels  indicate eek  of  last  reenbook.  The Journal  of  Commerce l o w G index  is  based almost entirely  n industrial  mmodities,  with  a small  weight  given  to  energy  commodities,  and the  KR-CRB o co spot  price  index  consists ntirely   industrial e of commodities,  excluding  energy. The KR-CRB futures  ndex  gives  about a i 60 percent  weight  to  food commodities and splits e  remaining weight  roughly th equally mong  energy commodities,  industrial mmodities,  and precious  metals. Copyright  for oural f  Commerce a co J o data is held by CIBCR, 1994.

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Selected inancial  arket Quotations' F M

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day  quotes xcept s  noted. e a
- 2.  Average  for wo-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest   date  shown.  Last bservation  he  average o  date or aintenance eriod nding t m p c o o ist t f m p e December 17,1997.

- 4. As of  September ,  1997,  commercial  paper ates  re hose ollected   the  Depository  rust ompany;  prior  ates  re verages f  offering tes 2 r a t c by T C r a a o ra at  several  arge  ealers. l d
- 5. Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t  11  a.m. ondon time. f E d a L
- 6.  Most  recent  bservation  ased  on  one-day  Thursday uote  and  futures rket  index hanges. o b q ma c
- 7.  Merrill  ynch Master  II  high-yield nd index omposite. L bo c
- 8. Quotes  for eek ending riday revious  o  date hown. w F p t s
- * Figures ited  re  as  of he lose  n November 10, 1997. c a t c o

Selected Interest  Rates

Short-Term

<!-- missing-text -->

Long-Term

<!-- missing-text -->

...

The decision by  the FOMC to keep the federal funds rate at 5-1/2 percent at its November meeting was widely expected and elicited little market response. In the  weeks that followed, spreading strains in  Asia solidified the sentiment that additional policy restraint would not be needed to  contain inflation, and, with economic data suggesting that domestic considerations would not otherwise force policymakers' hands, most interest rates moved lower. In recent days, though, surprising strength in the November employment report raised the question as to  whether System action might not be needed at some point, causing market interest rates to roll back some of their earlier declines. On net, over the intermeeting period, most interest rates have shown rather narrow, mixed changes, and spreads of  private over Treasury rates have held steady. The exception to that pattern is one-month rates, which bumped much higher when that maturity crossed the year-end. Futures rates currently price in about 1  to 2  percentage points of year-end pressures in  the federal funds market; these pressures about match the average expectations before year-end of  the past five years (chart).

Major equity indexes have gained 4  percent to 6  percent over the intermeeting period, reversing much of the price declines of late October. The notable exception has been the  NASDAQ composite, which has been held down by  the recent poor performance of technology stocks. Over the year to date, equity indexes have risen about 20 percent to 30 percent. The modest outflow from equity mutual funds in late October proved transitory; households have resumed fairly healthy net purchases of such funds. The main exception has been international funds, which have become less attractive to investors.

Indicators of  market skittishness have receded from the spikes of late October. Volatility inferred from option prices on  both bonds and equities has dropped to levels prevailing before the market correction. Although risk spreads on fixed-income instruments have retraced only part of their late-October runup, the spreads remain on  the narrow side, judging by  historical ranges.

With markets remaining quite receptive, bond issuance by nonfinancial businesses has picked up recently after slowing in November; equity issuance by  nonfinancial companies has remained

Financial arket M Futures and  Their  Year-End  Effects  on the Federal Funds  Rate

Federal Funds

Futures

Percent

6.00

5,

5.50

5.

-

5

Feb.

<!-- missing-text -->

5.00

Dec.

Jan.

Mar.

Apr.

Contract  months

<!-- missing-text -->

12/10/97

.........

11/10/97

fairly robust, although the price performance of new  stock offerings has been considerably less exuberant than it  was earlier this year. Borrowing by  households appears to  have strengthened in October, and recent indicators of household credit quality point to a  leveling out of debt strains in this sector. Treasury borrowing has remained light, forcing further cuts in auction sizes. Growth of the broader monetary aggregates turned up in  November, boosted by  currency demands and a  turnaround in  liquid deposits.

Business Finance

Despite the decline in  bond yields in  November, gross corporate bond issuance fell off sharply last month (table and chart). The investment-grade sector, which in  recent quarters has been issuing debt primarily to fund mergers and acquisitions, accounts for the bulk of the decline. For firms of  investment-grade status, mergers and takeovers involving cash payments are typically funded first with commercial paper, which is rolled over until later replaced by a  bond offering. In  November, a  number of large mergers were financed with commercial paper, but the rumored bond issues were either postponed or  trimmed in  size.

Speculative-grade bond issuance stayed at a  fairly high level in  November and early December. Although interest rate spreads increased from their record-low levels of  October, they remain subdued by  historical standards. In addition, corporate credit quality appears to  be solid. Business failures in  October and November dropped significantly from already low  rates posted earlier in the year, and the default rate on  junk bonds has remained very low.

Recent swings in  stock prices left little imprint on public equity issuance, as  offerings by  nonfinancial companies remained high in November (table and chart). The volume of IPOs hit $3.3 billion in  November, the largest monthly volume this year. However, the price performance of  these deals deteriorated noticeably. Most of the issues were completed with offering prices below the filing price range, and first-day price increases for IPOs averaged a  mere 6-1/2 percent, down from 22 percent in  October. In addition, more than 80 percent of seasoned offerings in  November fell in price. Meanwhile, equity retirements have remained very heavy. Companies continue to announce stock repurchase plans at a near-record pace, and ongoing merger activity will result in  about $25 billion of  equity retirements in the fourth quarter.

GROSS ISSUANCE OF  SECURITIES BY  U.S. CORPORATIONS (Billions of  dollars; monthly rates, not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may  not sum  to  totals because of  rounding. These data include speculative-grade bonds issued privately under Rule 144A. All other private placements are excluded. Total reflects gross proceeds rather than  par  value of  original discount bonds.

- 1. Excludes equity issues associated with equity-for-equity swaps that have occurred in  restructurings.
- 2. Bonds categorized according to  Moody's bond  ratings, or  to  Standard &amp;amp; Poor's if unrated by Moody's. Excludes mortgage-backed and  asset-backed bonds.

<!-- missing-text -->

Equity prices rebounded over the intermeeting period, and the NYSE and S&amp;P 500 indexes topped their peak October levels before dropping back in recent days. Earnings disappointments and downward revisions to projected earnings picked up some of late, but mostly they have been concentrated in the technology sector in  which exposures to  Asian problems also have raised concerns. Reflecting the heavy weighting of  technology stocks, the NASDAQ index remains about 8-1/2 percent below its October peak (chart, upper panel). Overall expectations of  earnings growth, however, remain surprisingly upbeat. The consensus of  Wall Street strategists' 1998 profit projections implies 7  percent growth in S&amp;P 500 earnings next year, little different from the view of two months ago. In addition, longer-term (five-year) growth projections for the S&amp;P 500, constructed from I/B/E/S surveys of company analysts, remain at the record-high levels of September (chart, middle left panel).

To  be sure, this optimism is fueled by  continued exceptional corporate performance. As  with earnings per share for the S&amp;P 500, growth in  NIPA book profits rebounded in the third quarter (chart, middle right panel). On a  seasonally adjusted basis, third-quarter NIPA profits were up roughly 2-3/4 percent from the second quarter and 10-1/2 percent from a  year earlier. However, price-earnings ratios are at all-time highs (chart, lower panel) and, given the late stage of  the current expansion, suggest extraordinary optimism about corporate prospects.

Mutual Funds

Mutual fund investors' enthusiasm for equities cooled off somewhat after the market correction of late October. Equity funds posted a  net outflow in  the last week of  that month. According to preliminary estimates, inflows recovered in November but at only half the pace of the prior two  months (table). Concerns about Asian and Latin American markets generated a  rare monthly net outflow from international funds. Net inflows to  domestic growth funds dropped from the high levels posted in  the third quarter. To some extent, the stock market's gyrations heightened investors' interest in  bond funds, which are  more stable. As a  result of this substitution, the net inflow to bond funds picked up  well above its third-quarter pace.

Liquidity ratios at equity funds remain around 5  percent, a  low level by  historical standards although they proved adequate to  meet limited investor withdrawals when they have occurred in  recent weeks

Corporate  Finance

*Based on Goldman  Sach's estimates f o S&amp;P 500 quarterly  perating arnings. o e

<!-- missing-text -->

Net Sales of  Selected  Mutual Funds

(Billions of dollars; uarterly  and  annual  data at  monthly  rate) q

(Excluding  Reinvested Distributions)

<!-- missing-text -->

Source: Investment Company  Institute (10C)

- 1. Includes  precious  metals  funds  not  shown  elsewhere.
- e Staff stimates, ased on weekly e b ICI totals.

Liquidity  atios for  Domestic R Long-Term Mutual  Funds

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Liquidity ratio s ash and short-term ecurities  s  a percent  of otal  ssets. i c s a t a

Source. Investment  Company Institute.

Delinquency  Rates  on Household Loans

Mortgages :-

<!-- missing-text -->

Closed-End  Loans at  Banks

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

(chart). Many mutual funds reportedly have secured committed lines of credit from banks and other backup sources to supplement liquidity in  the event of  heavy withdrawals.

Banking

The share prices of money center banks were hard-hit by the financial market turmoil of late October and November but have since about caught up  with the S&amp;P 500. Evidently, market participants came to  the realization that, in  the aggregate, banks' exposure to Asia  was not sizable enough to affect the health of  the industry significantly. Country exposure reports through June indicate that money center banks had about $38 billion of loans to  Japan and $27 billion to  other troubled countries in  Asia; for the banking system as a  whole, that aggregate exposure represents a  small proportion of banks' capital. Nonetheless, a  number of  money center banks have reported negative effects on fourth-quarter earnings as a result of unsettled conditions in  global markets.

Data from the September Call Report indicate that loan delinquency rates at  banks held steady or even improved a  bit (chart). However, in  the most recent survey of senior Federal Reserve bank examiners, a  third of  the respondents indicated that they believed that loan portfolio quality had deteriorated in  the third quarter, owing to problems with credit card loans. About a  quarter of the examiners had reported some deterioration in  the second quarter.

Household Sector

Consumer credit grew 10-1/2 percent at  an annual rate in October, as all three major components accelerated from the prior month (table). Smoothing through monthly swings, consumer debt seems to  be expanding at about the same rate as personal income. Data on mortgage borrowing in  the fourth quarter are scarce: Growth in real estate loans at commercial banks slowed in  October to  about half the third-quarter pace but appears to have picked up in November. Meanwhile, the MBA indexes of  applications for purchase and refinance remain quite high, suggesting healthy mortgage borrowing.

Following the recent flattening of  the yield curve, the spread between the initial rate on  fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) and that on adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) has fallen to a  near-record low level of 165 basis points (chart). The relative attractiveness of FRMs has been reflected in  a  declining share of ARM  originations, to

Consumer Credit

n.a.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Annual data  are  averages of uarterly  ata  for ommercial banks and of  monthly data  for inance ompanies. q d c f c
- 2.  Average of  most common rate harged for pecified  ype  and maturity uring  the  first  eK  of  the  middle month c s t d we of each quarter.
- 3. Stated  APR averaged across  all redit  ard  accounts  at ll eporting anks during he  period. c c a r b t
- 4.  Average rate for all oans  of ach type,  regardless f  maturity,  ade l e o m during  the  period.
- p Preliminary. .a.  Not  available. n

Freddie  Mac  FRM and ARM Rates

(Commitment rates,  not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

(Not  seasonally  adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Details may not sum  to totals because of  rounding.

1.

Direct loan

financing, accrued

items, checks

issued and

other transactions.

- e  Estimated.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Excludes mortgage pass-through securities issued by FNMA and FHLMC.

less checks

paid,

only about 18 percent of  the total conventional mortgage originations and a  lowering of  the ARM share of outstandings to less than 25 percent. Interest rates on FRMs have followed the decline in  Treasury rates, to 7.15 percent most recently, the lowest level in almost two years and about 40 basis points above their cyclical lows in 1993.

Government Finance

The federal deficit is expected to rise in the fourth quarter, reflecting the typical seasonal pattern. The Treasury will finance most of the fourth-quarter deficit by borrowing from the public, although it is also expected to reduce its cash balance by a significant amount. In light of  the continued small deficit, the Treasury has reduced auction sizes further, cutting the three-month and six-month bill auctions each by  $250 million in  mid-November. Part of the financing in  the bill sector has taken the form of a $21 billion cash management bill that will mature after the midJanuary tax receipts.

Spreading financial strains in Asia have heightened concerns in the  market that foreign holders may  be  forced to sell some of their Treasury securities in large volume to bolster income statements by realizing profits and to fund repayment of  dollar or  home currency liabilities. Foreign official dollar reserves have recently leveled off, and the Federal Reserve's custody holdings for foreign central banks have declined about $25 billion from their April peak. (These custody holdings include securities financed through official currency interventions in the foreign exchange market.) However, any drop in demand from these sources seems at least to have been offset by the redirection of  funds by other investors toward the safety and liquidity provided by Treasury securities as  well as by perceptions of restraint on  demand and prices in the United States.

Spreads between noncallable, agency-issued securities and Treasuries have remained stable over the intermeeting period. Unlike earlier in  the year, no global bond was issued, probably because the GSEs were reluctant to tap foreign financial markets at a  time of turmoil abroad. The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation recently guaranteed an issue of so-called CRA  mortgage bonds, which are based on loans to lowand moderate-income homeowners. Purchasing such bonds will help banks satisfy requirements arising from the 1977 Community Reinvestment Act. Besides the implicit government guarantee, the lower repayment risk

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Includes issues for  public and  private purposes.

1. Includes all refunding bonds, not just advance refundings.

Tax-Exempt to  Taxable  Yield  Ratio

<!-- missing-text -->

of such loans--since lower-income borrowers have fewer refinancing options--makes the CRA bonds attractive.

Gross offerings of long-term municipal securities dropped about $2  billion, to $16.7 billion in  November, owing to a  continued falloff in refundings from their fast third-quarter pace. Yields on long-term tax exempts declined some (table), though by much less than yields on  Treasuries of similar maturities (chart), and the ratio of  municipal yields to  taxable yields rose further.

Monetary and Credit Aggregates

The  monetary aggregates grew briskly in November: M2 and M3 expanded at annual rates of 7 percent and 11 percent respectively, putting M2 just above, and M3  well above, their annual ranges. Rather than extending its trend decline, Ml grew near an 8 percent annual rate last month, reflecting the unusually rapid expansion of currency and demand deposits. Some of  this increase in currency was attributable to shipments to Russia. Demand deposits also surged, boosted by a  slight, probably temporary slowdown in the introduction of  new sweeps and a  pickup in  mortgage refinancing induced by the decline in longer-term rates last month. (Funds used to prepay existing mortgages are sometimes temporarily held in escrow in  these accounts.)

M2 growth provided a  boost to  M3, which was amplified by a substitution of  managed liabilities in  M3 for other sources of funds. The growth of large time deposits ticked up to a 12-1/2 percent pace in  November, while RPs almost doubled at an annual rate. Banks apparently had more assets to fund last month, judging by the expansion of  bank credit.

Bank credit, adjusted for the effects of  mark-to-market accounting rules, grew at  an annual rate of 11-1/2 percent in November, a  rapid pace in  line with that of  the previous two months and  well above that of  earlier in 1997. In  particular, commercial banks significantly expanded their securities portfolio in  November, which contributed to the growth of  bank credit and probably boosted the growth of  RPs. This expansion in the securities portfolio mainly occurred at large domestic and foreign banks and was apparent in both government and other securities.

Business loan growth slowed from a 10 percent rate in October to a  5-1/4 percent pace in  November, even though banks remain vigorous in their pursuit of  C&amp;I loans: In the third-quarter bank examiner survey, for instance, respondents by a  wide margin

MONETARY AGGREGATES (Based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  Sum  of seasonally adjusted Ml, retail money  market funds, savings deposits, and  small time deposits.
- 3.  Sum of retail money funds, savings deposits, and small time deposits, each seasonally adjusted separately.
- 4.  Sum  of large time deposits, institutional money funds, RP  liabilities of depository institutions, and Eurodollars held  by  U.S. addressees, each seasonally adjusted separately.
- 5.  Net of  holdings of depository institutions, money market mutual funds, U.S. government, and foreign banks and official institutions.
- 6.  Sweep figures used to  adjust these series are the estimated national total of transaction account balances initially swept into MMDAs owing to  the introduction of  new sweep programs, on  the basis of  monthly averages of  daily data.
- 7.  M2 less demand deposits
- 8.  For the  years shown, "average monthly change" is the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter dollar change, divided by  12. For the quarters shown, it is  the quarter-to-quarter dollar change, divided by  3.

p--Preliminary.

Commercial Bank  Credit

(Percent  change; seasonally  adjusted  annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  Adjusted  for reaks caused b by reclassifications. thly  levels re  pro rata verages of  weekly (Wednesday)  levels.  uarMon a a Q terly  evels  not hown) are simple  averages  of  monthly levels. nual levels  not hown) are levels  or  he  fourth  uarter.  rowth rates l ( s An ( s f t q G shown are  percentage changes in  consecutive  levels,  nnualized  but  not  compounded. a

- 1.  djusted  to  remove  effects  f ark-to-market  accounting  rules A o m (FIN  39 and FASB 115).
- 2.  Includes ecurities   corporations,  tate nd local overnments,  and foreign overnments and any trading ccount  assets  that s of s a g g a are  not U.S. government  securities.
- 3. Excludes interbank oans. l
- 4.  Includes n estimate  of  outstanding  loans  securitized a by commercial banks.
- 5. Includes ecurity  oans,  loans  to armers, tate nd local  overnments, and all  thers  not  elsewhere classified. o  includes s l f s a g o Als lease financing eceivables. r
- p Preliminary.

Commercial and Industrial Loan  Rates

(Spreads  ver  intended  ederal o f funds rate,  y  loan ize) b s

<!-- missing-text -->

More  than  $1,000,000

<!-- missing-text -->

$100,000 to $1,000,000

<!-- missing-text -->

Less  than $100,000

<!-- missing-text -->

identified that category as  the one in which terms and standards had been eased the most. The most recent survey of bank lending terms indicates that spreads on  business loans edged lower in  the fourth quarter (chart). According to the survey, spreads are a  bit higher than one year ago for loans greater than $1,000,000, probably reflecting a  shift toward riskier loans; spreads on smaller loans are lower on  net.

Despite strains in  Japan, credit extended by  Japanese branches and  agencies has remained about flat of late. While real estate loans at  those entities have continued to run off, their business lending has picked up the slack.

APPENDIX REVIEW OF DEBT AND  MONEY IN 1997

Summary

Growth of  the total debt of  domestic nonfinancial sectors slowed in 1997, but that of  M2 and M3 picked up. The decline in  the growth of  total debt reflected a  sharply reduced expansion of federal debt owing to the smaller fiscal deficit. Nonfederal debt grew at  the same rate as last year, as a deceleration of  household debt matched a  slight acceleration of  business debt and a  more noticeable pickup in state and local debt. Strong growth in depository credit--particularly bank credit--contributed to  rapid expansion in  M3. With opportunity costs little changed, M2 expanded at roughly the same rate as nominal GDP.

Domestic Nonfinancial Debt

Domestic nonfinancial debt advanced at a 4-1/2 percent rate through October, notably slower than nominal GDP but near the middle of  its monitoring range. Federal debt grew less than 1  percent this year, down from 3-3/4 percent last year. The fiscal 1997 deficit was  below that of any  year since 1974. Nonfederal debt grew at a 5-3/4 percent rate.

Household Finance. After slowing by  nearly half in 1996, growth in  consumer credit edged down further this year. This moderation occurred despite a  pickup in consumer outlays and likely reflected a  more cautious attitude toward credit use by  households, substitution of home mortgage borrowing for consumer credit, and a more restrictive posture by  bank lenders toward some borrowers. The delinquency rate on  banks' consumer loans seems to  have plateaued this year, albeit at a  high level, but the charge-off rate rose to new  highs, and personal bankruptcies continued to increase rapidly through the first half of  the year before stabilizing in the third quarter.

In contrast, substitutions of real estate loans for consumer loans and robust growth in  residential structures bolstered total home mortgage growth, although the pace was a  bit lower than last year. At banks, home equity lending expanded at a  double-digit pace as banks reportedly encouraged customers to  use this source of  funds to consolidate their credit card debt. More dramatically, other lenders, particularly finance companies, have been aggressively offering mortgages with loan-to-value ratios of 100 percent or more as a  means of consolidating other debt. The home equity and nonbank mortgage market were undergirded by a  strong appetite by  investors for securities collateralized by these loans. Delinquency and charge-off rates on  home mortgage loans, including home equity loans, remained low.

Business Finance. Business debt expanded at a  fairly rapid 6  percent rate this year, up a  bit from last year. A surge in capital outlays outpaced a  hefty advance in  internal funds, and merger-related equity retirements remained brisk. With this year's appreciable business borrowing, the deleveraging of nonfinancial corporations' balance sheets that has been going on since the early 1990s has about stopped. Measures of  the financial condition of the business sector, on  balance, were favorable. Upgrades of corporate

debt about matched downgrades, and bond defaults. C&amp;I delinquency rates, and charge-off rates all remained low; in contrast, business bankruptcies rose somewhat, albeit from a  low level. Credit markets continued to  be quite receptive to new  debt offerings, as corporate bond spreads stayed near historical lows, widening only modestly during the financial turbulence this fall. Banks also continued to be  willing lenders, reporting further reductions in  spreads of loan rates over benchmark rates. The gross issuance of  bonds by nonfinancial corporations through November was more than a  third higher than in 1996; junk bonds accounted for an  unusually large part of the increase. Gross issuance of equity also was strong, but net issuance remained deeply negative because of  merger-related retirements and a  large volume of stock buybacks by corporations.

Commercial mortgages grew moderately for the second consecutive year, as  prices and activity in commercial building continued to strengthen. Banks were the largest source of  funds for these loans. Another significant source of funds was commercial-mortgage-backed securities, and their popularity likely held down real estate loan growth at banks. Indeed, increases this year, through September, in securities backed by  all types of income property mortgages, including multifamily, nearly equaled increases in  the outstanding amount of these loans on  banks' books.

State and Local Finance. State and local debt expanded a little more than 5  percent in 1997. after leveling out last year following two years of  declines. Municipal debt outstanding had been held down in recent years by  the retirement of bonds that were advanced refunded in the early 1990s, but this factor has become much less pronounced because advance-refunded debt was largely worked down by  the end of 1996.

Depository credit

Credit extended by  depository institutions expanded at a 6-1/4 percent pace through November, up appreciably from last year. Bank credit accelerated to an  8-1/4 percent pace, owing in part to the acquisition of thrifts by  banks. The increase in  bank credit was  the fastest in  ten years, and banks' share of domestic nonfinancial debt outstanding climbed to its highest level since 1988. Bank credit accelerated in part because banks accumulated securities--which had run off in 1995 and had been flat in 1996--at a  brisk pace in 1997. Loans also advanced a  bit more quickly this year than last, though more slowly than in 1995.

The solid growth in  bank loans occurred despite a  net decline in consumer loans that owed to sharply slower growth in loans originated by  banks and continued robust securitizations. Real estate loans at  banks, by  contrast, have grown at nearly twice the pace posted in 1996. This category of credit has benefited from the rapid growth in  home equity lines, the turnaround in commercial real estate lending, an  acceleration in  home mortgages, and thrift acquisitions.

C&amp;I loan expansion was strong this year, partly because of the factors boosting business borrowing in general but also because banks increased their share of  the business credit market. Mergers and acquisitions picked up among middle-market firms, which are more likely than large corporations to use bank financing. In addition, banks continued to compete vigorously for business loans, narrowing spreads and easing other terms. To date, however, Senior Loan

Officer Surveys have found little evidence that banks are easing standards on  these loans, and C&amp;I loan charge-off and delinquency rates remain extremely low.

Continued high profitability and abundance of  capital facilitated an  aggressive position by  banks. Certainly, some banks faced credit quality problems on  their consumer loans, which led to consolidation of  a  few credit card lenders. But overall delinquency and charge-off rates stayed quite low, and banks' return on equity remained in  the elevated range it  has occupied for several years.

Like banks, thrifts are profitable and  well capitalized, and they also were actively pursuing borrowers in 1997. The slowing in thrift credit growth reflected the acquisition of  thrifts by commercial banks: Among thrifts not acquired during the year, assets grew roughly 8  percent.

Monetary aggregates

Boosted in part by  the solid growth in  depository credit. M3 shot up  this year, expanding 8-1/2 percent through November, well above its 2  to 6  percent annual range. M3  was augmented by  a funding shift, concentrated at U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, from borrowings from related offices abroad, which are not included in  M3, to large time deposits issued in the United States, which are. Another factor contributing to the strength in  M3 was the increasing inroads made by  institution-only money fund., in corporate cash management.

While not matching the strong pace of  M3, M2 grew at a  healthy 5-1/4 percent rate through November, a  touch above its 1  to 5  percent annual range. Even though the opportunity cost of  holding M2 was about unchanged over the  year. M2 appears to  have grown a little more slowly than nominal GDP, continuing the upward drift in velocity that has occurred for the past few  years. The ongoing adoption of sweep programs by  banks again resulted in considerable growth in  the savings and MMDAs component of  M2 at the expense of transactions accounts. The initiation of  programs that sweep funds out of NOW  accounts appears to  be slowing, but retail demand deposit sweeps have picked up, leaving the total amount by  which sweep account balances increased similar to last year. Inflows to  M2 money funds picked up toward year-end, probably in response to  the turbulence in the stock market. Indeed, inflows into bond and stock mutual funds did slow a  bit in  November, but 1997 could well be a record year for these funds. Currency growth was strong, boosting M2 expansion. Shipments of  currency abroad, while still elevated, were off a  bit from  the extraordinary levels seen in recent years, but the effects of strong domestic spending were more than offsetting.

III-A-4

THE  GROWTH AND FLOW OF MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES (Q4 to  Q4 averages,  easonally djusted  nless  otherwise oted) s a u n

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

US. International  de Tra in Goods and Services

In  September,  the eficit d in  U.S. international de  n goods and tra i services  idened, as  exports eclined  nd imports ose.  For  the  third w d a r quarter,  he  deficit t was significantly  ger  han  that  ecorded  n the lar t r i second  quarter, t  not  much  larger  han  the eficit bu t d in  the irst f quarter.  rade  data or ctober  will  e released  n December 18. T f O b o

<!-- missing-text -->

Source. U.S. Dept. of  Commerce, Bureaus of  Economic Analysis and Census.

Exports of  goods and services in  the third quarter were only marginally higher than those in the second quarter. Increased exports of  machinery, industrial supplies, and higher service receipts (half from foreign travelers in  the United States and half from other private services) were nearly offset by  sharp drops in exports of  aircraft and gold. By  region, increases in shipments to Mexico and other Latin American countries were more than offset by small declines in exports to  most other areas (including Japan and other countries in  Asia).

Imports of  goods and services in the third quarter were 1-1/2 percent higher compared with the second quarter. There were increases in  most major trade categories; the exceptions were imports of gold and petroleum products.

Oil Imports and Prices

The quantity of  imported oil increased again in  the third quarter relative to  the second quarter, marking two consecutive quarters of strong increases in  oil imports. These relatively high import levels were driven by  extremely robust consumption in  the

U.S. International rade T in  Goods and  Services

<!-- missing-text -->

- 3/ Excludes Canada  and Mexico.

U.S. EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF  GOODS AND SERVICES

(Billions of dollars, SAAR, BOP basis)

<!-- missing-text -->

of  Commerce, Bureaus of  Economic Analysis and Census.

second and third quarters--up more than three percent from rates observed a  year ago. Preliminary Department of  Energy statistics indicate that oil imports remained strong in  October due to continued high consumption demand.

The price of  imported oil rose 5  percent in October after declining 1/2 percent in September. Tensions in the Middle East-that led to a  buildup of  U.S. forces in  the Persian Gulf and a perceived threat to oil supplies from the region--contributed to  the jump in  October prices. On  balance, import prices have moved relatively little since April of  this year.

The spot price for WTI rose $1.47 per barrel in  October, averaging $21.26 per barrel and reflecting increased tensions in the Middle East. Prices declined $1.09 per barrel in  November, when the United States field commander explained that U.S. forces had no intention of  engaging in  armed conflict with Iran and dropped further when the Persian Gulf coalition partners announced that force would be  used against Iraq as a  last resort. Prices have been pushed even lower in  December in reaction to OPEC's announcement of a  nearly 10 percent increase in  its production quota. Spot WTI is currently trading below $19 per barrel for the first time since January 1996.

Prices of  Non-oil Imports and Exports

Non-oil import prices continued their downward trend in October-November, but  at  a  somewhat faster rate than in  the third quarter. Most of  the declines were in  foods, computers, semiconductors, and other capital goods. In contrast, prices of imported automotive products rose.

Export prices decreased moderately in  October-November. The declines were primarily attributable to lower prices for agricultural products, other industrial supplies, and capital goods. Increased prices were recorded for exports of  automotive products and consumer goods.

U.S. Current Account

The U.S. current account deficit widened $17.2 billion (SAAR) in the third quarter. A  larger deficit for net goods and services accounted for most of  the change from second to  third quarters. Only small changes were recorded for investment income and transfers.

<!-- missing-text -->

- e. Average of two months.

Oil  Prices

<!-- missing-text -->

The balance on goods and services weakened $16 billion (SAAR) in the third quarter. Exports of  goods and services rose only marginally following three quarters of  strong growth. Imports increased 1-1/2 percent with the rise spread over most trade categories.

For investment income in the third quarter, there was a  small decline in  net direct investment income receipts (payments rose more than receipts rose) that was largely offset by  a  small strengthening in  net portfolio income payments (private receipts from abroad rose more than U.S. income payments to foreigners rose).

U.S. International Financial Transactions

The fallout from the turmoil in  Asian financial markets is apparent in  the data on  U.S. international transactions in October. Reflecting a  flight to quality, private foreigners bought net more than $30 billion in  U.S. Treasury securities (line 4a on  the Summary of  U.S. International Transactions table). As  usual, the bulk of these sales was to the United Kingdom, with the identity of the ultimate purchaser unknown. However, it  was also reported that residents of  Japan, Mexico, and Hong Kong made large direct net purchases. In addition, private foreigners purchased net over $7 billion in  U.S. government agency bonds (included in  line 4b); Japanese residents accounted for about $4.5 billion of  this total. Foreign net purchases of  U.S. corporate stocks (line 4c) declined from the  August and September pace, but remained relatively strong despite the market dip. Increases in foreign holdings of  U.S. currency also have picked up in recent months (line 8).

U.S. net purchases of  foreign bonds (line 5a) dropped sharply in October, while net purchases of  foreign stocks (line 5b) recovered somewhat. Net purchases of  securities in Europe more than accounted for the total.

Banks in  the United States continued to report net outflows in October (line 3). The reported outflow was more than accounted for by  transactions between U.S. branches of  foreign banks and their parents. These outflows appear to reflect in  part borrowing in the United States through RP  transactions by  a  Japanese financial institution. Countering these outflows slightly, liabilities of Mexico have been increasing in  recent months.

SUMMARY OF  U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS (Billions of dollars, not  seasonally justed  xcept ad e as noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. The  sum of  official capital, private capital, the  current account balance, and  the  statistical discrepancy is  zero. Details may  not  sum  to  totals because of  rounding.

- 5. Transactions by nonbanking concerns and  other  banking and official transactions not  shown  elsewhere plus  amounts resulting from  adjustments made  by the  Department of  Commerce and  revisions in  lines 1 through 5 since  publication of  the  quarterly data  in  the  Survey of Current Business.

n.a.  Not  available.

Less  than

*

$50

million.

<!-- missing-text -->

Source. U.S. Department of  Commerce, Bureau of  Economic Analysis.

Foreign official assets in the United States (line 1) declined in  October. In  Asia, holdings of  China and Hong Kong increased, but holdings of  Taiwan, Singapore, Korea, and Malaysia declined. In Latin America there were substantial declines in  holdings of  Brazil and Mexico. Preliminary data from  FRBNY indicate a  sharp decline in Russian holdings in November.

Data recently released by  the Department of  Commerce indicate that foreign direct investment in  the  United States (line 7)  slipped somewhat in  the third quarter from the  very strong pace of  the first half. U.S. direct investment abroad (line 6)  also slipped from the very high second-quarter level: the large intercompany outflows to finance company affiliates in  the United Kingdom in  the second quarter were reversed in part in  the third quarter. Both inflows and outflows of  direct investment continue to  be swelled by  numerous mergers and acquisitions.

INTERNATIONAL BANKING DATA 1

(Billions of dollars)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Data on  lines 1  through 3  are from Federal Reserve sources and sometimes differ in timing from the banking data incorporated in  the  U.S. international transactions accounts.

Lines la, lb, and 2a are averages of  daily data reported on  the FR  2950 and FR2951.

Lines 2b and 3b are end-of-period data reported quarterly on the FFIEC 002s. Line 3a is an average of  daily data (FR  2050) supplemented by  the  FR  2502 and end-of-quarter data supplied by  the Bank of  Canada and the  Bank of  England. There is a break in the series in April 1994.

Lines 4  and 5  are end-of-period data estimated by  BEA  on  the basis of data provided by  the BIS, the  Bank of  England, and the FR  2502 and FFIEC 002s. They include some foreign-currency denominated deposits and loans. Source: SCB

Commerce Department data also indicate that the Eurodollar deposits of U.S.  nonbanks  continued to increase in the third quarter(line 5 on the  International Banking Data Table). Credit extended  to U.S.  nonbanks  from banks  outside the  United  States also grew in the third quarter  (line 4). Overall,  recorded credits  in the U.S.  international transactions  accounts continued to  exceed recorded debits,  resulting in a very large negative statistical discrepancy.

Foreign Exchange and  International  Asset Markets

Since the November FOMC meeting, the dollar has strengthened 4 percent  against the  yen. The weakness of the yen vis-A-vis  the dollar is  generally attributed to concerns  over financial fragility, the slow pace  of  economic activity, monetary easing by the Bank of Japan, and  competitive pressures from other Asian economies. Japanese long-term bond yields have remained  close to  their historically  low levels. The rise of the Japanese 3-month rate by 24 basis  points  reflects the emergence  of a  "Japan premium,"  an increased funding cost of Japanese banks,  caused by heightened credit  quality concerns as  well as by end-of-year "window-dressing" efforts  by non-Japanese banks to reduce their reported exposure to Japanese banks. Japanese share prices rose 2-1/2  percent on balance during the intermeeting period while undergoing sharp fluctuations, reflecting ongoing uncertainty over the manner in which the government will  commit public funds  to  support the banking system.

The Korean won, which had begun to depreciate earlier  in the fall,  accelerated  its  decline

Immediately

following the announcement of the IMF-led stabilization package the won gained 5 percent against the dollar, but depreciated  rapidly thereafter on market concerns that the IMF package, even if implemented  as announced, will  fail  to  restore market confidence;  on balance, the won depreciated 42  percent against the dollar through December 11. Korean share prices  fell 28  percent over the same time period.

The currencies of the other East Asian emerging economies-the main exceptions being China and  Hong Kong--also depreciated

Exchange Rates (Daily  Indices, ov. 10, 1997 = 100) N

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

10,  1997 = 10

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Change is  in  percentage points.

P Preliminary.

against  the dollar.

The Thai  baht declined further after the debt  ratings  of several Thai  financial  institutions were downgraded; on balance, the baht declined 13 percent. The Malaysian ringgit fell  12  percent, while the  Philippine peso  fell 6-1/2 percent. The Singapore dollar  and Taiwan dollar participated to a  lesser degree in  the waves of depreciations;  these two  currencies  declined  2-1/2 and  3-3/4 percent  against the dollar, respectively.

Equity prices  in most East Asian emerging economies continued to  decline on reports  of mounting economic  difficulties. Thailand's stock market fell  24  percent in the intermeeting period,  and Indonesian share prices fell  14  percent. Malaysia's stock market, which fell  sharply earlier  in the intermeeting period,  reacted positively to  new, austere budget measures proposed by the government in late November, rising  12  percent  on balance since December 1. The Philippine stock market  rose 1-1/4 percent on balance.

The dollar strengthened 3-1/2 percent against  the mark. The mark's  depreciation occurred amid data  releases that indicate that German inflation continues to be benign and output  growth moderate. In  addition, statements by Bundesbank officials that they see no immediate need to raise  interest  rates to  contain inflation and comments by several European central bank officials that Europeanwide  interest rates will  converge closer to the  low end  of the current  spectrum of European interest rates also weighed  on the mark. German and French bond yields fell about 30 basis  points during the intermeeting period;  corresponding short-term interest rates were largely unchanged. Italian short-term rates fell 56 basis points  and  long-term rates fell  44  basis points,  reflecting the continued movement of Italian rates towards German and French rates. The Swedish central bank announced  on December 11  that it would  raise its repo rate by 25 basis points  to  4.35  percent;  the Riksbank stated that this policy measure was taken in order to  help meet its 1998 inflation targets.

The U.S. dollar strengthened 1-1/4 percent against the Canadian dollar. The Canadian currency's weakness was attributed by  some market analysts to falling commodity prices following the sharp decline of  Asian growth. The Bank of  Canada raised its Bank Rate by 25 basis points on  November 25 to offset the stimulative effect of  the depreciating Canadian dollar. The Canadian long-term bond yield increased by 19 basis points and the Canadian 3-month interest rate rose by  30  basis points, in step with the increase in the overnight policy rate set by  the Bank of Canada. The dollar strengthened 2  percent against sterling, supported by  a  narrowing of the spread between U.K. and U.S. long-term interest rates.

Share prices in the industrialized countries, with the exception of Canada, are up since the November FOMC meeting and have recovered most of  the losses sustained in late October and early November. Equity prices in Germany and the United Kingdom rose 7 and 5  percent, respectively, during the intermeeting period. The comparative weakness of  the Canadian stock market, which fell almost 2  percent on balance, is being attributed to the effects of declining world market prices of  primary commodities and gold on  the profitability of  a  large number of Canadian companies.

The exchange value of  the  Mexican peso, which had fallen sharply against the dollar in late October and early November, has risen 3/4 percent since the last FOMC meeting. The peso's rebound may  be  attributed to rising market confidence in the ability of Mexico to  weather the financial crises originating in  Asia. Yield spreads on  Latin American Brady bonds, which had  increased in October, fell by  140 and 210 basis points in the intermeeting period. The stock markets of  Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina rose between 5  and 10 percent.

The Czech koruna fell 6  percent against the dollar on the fallout of  a  political scandal and the subsequent resignation of  the entire Czech cabinet towards the end of  November. The Russian ruble fell 3/4 percent vis--vis the dollar.

The price of  gold has declined 8  percent since the November FOMC to $284 per fine ounce, as  markets perceived a  continued trend towards a  lower demand for monetary gold by  the world's central banks.

The Desk did not intervene  in the foreign exchange market during the  period.

Developments in  Foreign Industrial  Countries

Real GDP  growth in  the foreign G-7  countries averaged  about  4 percent  on  an  export-weighted basis  in the  third quarter, and preliminary  indicators for the fourth quarter  suggest continued above-trend  growth in most  countries. The pace of expansion remains particularly robust in  Canada and the United Kingdom, fueled  largely by strong domestic demand growth. Both the German and  French economies also continued to  expand at healthy rates in the third quarter. However, Italian growth has  slowed in  the second half of the year, while the Japanese economy has  rebounded only modestly following last April's  consumption tax increase. The impact of the crisis in  southeast Asia,  which is  expected to be much more severe in  Japan than  in  the other countries, has  not  yet become fully apparent  in  current  indicators.

Unemployment  generally remains high, and  year-over-year consumer  price inflation is  currently below 2 percent in Canada and the major continental European countries. Although the consumption tax increase and some other temporary factors have recently pushed measured inflation in Japan to  around 2 percent, the underlying rate remains  low there as well. In  contrast, recent evidence suggests that  inflationary pressure is  continuing to  build in the United Kingdom as  labor markets tighten.

Individual  country notes. In Japan, third-quarter GDP expanded at a 3.1  percent  rate,  registering only a modest rebound from the second quarter's double-digit decline. Private  consumption retraced about a third  of its  second-quarter drop,  led by an increase in new car  sales. Private non-residential  investment grew at  a  6 rate,  offsetting a second-quarter decline of identical magnitude. Residential  investment, however, plunged by 36  percent, reaching its  lowest level  since the first  quarter of 1987. Government  consumption and public  investment jointly  contributed 3/4  f  a percentage point to  growth, partially reversing declines o registered in recent quarters. Net exports made a negative

contribution to growth as exports fell a  bit from their very high second-quarter levels.

<!-- missing-text -->

Economic indicators for the fourth quarter suggest a continuation of  the economy's lackluster performance. Industrial production during October and new car registrations during October and  November were essentially unchanged from their third-quarter levels, and labor market conditions appear to be  deteriorating. Inflation, net of  the effect of  the tax increase, remains virtually nonexistent.

Import volumes in  October increased slightly from thirdquarter levels, but the volume of  exports was up by  10 percent. However, the October data provided the first glimpse of  the effects of  the Asia crisis on Japanese trade, with exports to  Thailand declining 20 percent from their year-earlier level. In addition, foreign orders for machinery fell sharply in  October.

In  mid-November, the Japanese government released a  package of 120 economic stimulus measures, including proposals for further deregulation, plans to improve the liquidity of  the real estate market and the efficiency of  land use, and measures designed to stimulate private investment. However, the government's package

<!-- missing-text -->

largely reflected two previously released LDP packages, and did not include any direct fiscal stimulus measures.

In recent weeks, two large Japanese financial institutions have failed. On  November 17, the Japanese authorities announced the closure of  Hokkaido Takushoku Bank (HTB), one of  the twenty-five largest Japanese banks with assets of  9 trillion (about $72 billion). The  majority of  HTB's operations will be  assumed by Hokuyo Bank, a  second-tier regional bank in  Hokkaido. All of  HTB's depositors will be  protected, but its management will be  forced to resign. On  November 24, Yamaichi Securities, Japan's fourth-largest brokerage house, reported that it  was voluntarily suspending operations. Yamaichi announced that its capital base, which was previously reported as 431 billion (about $3.4 billion) at endSeptember 1997, was being revised downward by 265 billion (about $2.1 billion), reflecting the acknowledgement of  unrealized losses and  a  variety of  other off-balance-sheet debt. The Bank of  Japan has  provided liquidity to both Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Yamaichi Securities, as  well as to  the market as a  whole, in  an  effort to minimize disruptions as these institutions conclude their business operations.

Real GDP in Germany rose at a 3.2 percent annual rate in  the third quarter. The external sector continued to  provide the primary impetus to growth, as exports rose at  a  double-digit rate for the second consecutive quarter. In contrast, private consumption declined sharply, retreating to its first-quarter level. Although the growth in  total investment was modest, spending on machinery and equipment was up sharply. Inventory accumulation was sizable, but inventory figures are a  residual in the national accounts and are subject to substantial revision.

<!-- missing-text -->

Early indicators for the fourth quarter suggest that the economic expansion continued. Industrial production rose sharply in October following the declines registered in  August and September. Manufacturing orders fell in  October for a  second consecutive month but remain at a  high level following rapid gains over the two preceding quarters. The  October decline was due primarily to  a sharp drop in orders from foreign firms, while domestic orders showed a  strong gain. Business confidence also dropped back a little in  October but remains high. However, conditions in  the labor market are still stagnant, with the all-German unemployment rate remaining at 11.8 percent in  November. CPI inflation has

fallen back recently to  below 2  percent on  a  12-month basis. following a  slight acceleration during the summer.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Western  Germany.
- 2. Percent f  firms o (in manufacturing, onstruction,  olesale, nd c wh a retail) citing  n improvement  in business  onditions  current  d a c ( an expected  over  the ext  six  onths) less  hose iting  deterioration n m t c a in conditions.
- 3. Percent hange  from  previous ear. c y

In France, third-quarter real GDP increased at a  3.7 percent annual rate, following a  4.5 percent rate increase in  the second quarter. Domestic demand growth more than accounted for the robust third-quarter expansion, as the contribution from  net exports turned negative. Consumption growth picked up sharply from its sluggish pace earlier in the year, and investment growth increased as  well, contrary to expectations. Given the imprecise nature of  initial investment estimates and the variable consumption performance, it is still early to tell whether the economic expansion has become more broadly-based. Increased investment over the past two quarters, however, is consistent with recent strength in  capital goods production, which business surveys and balance of  trade data had earlier suggested were primarily export-oriented.

The limited information available so far for the fourth quarter suggests that economic activity is continuing to expand, although probably at a  more moderate pace than in the third quarter. Consumption of  manufactured products rebounded in  October following

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Annual changes  are Q4/Q4.

two  months of  declines to a  level slightly above the third-quarter average, partly reflecting increased back-to-school allowances. However, business surveys in October-November continue to  highlight strong foreign orders (which  have not been affected to date by  the crisis in  emerging-Asia), and do not indicate a  further acceleration in  domestic demand. Also, investment expectations for 1997 have been revised down. The unemployment rate has remained at an historically high level of  12.5 percent all year, and inflation pressures remained subdued.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Percent hange  from previous  ear. c y

Real GDP in the United Kingdom increased at a  3.6 percent annual rate in the third quarter. Consumer spending registered another quarter of strong growth, while the contribution of  net exports turned positive again. Fixed investment declined, as  the aircraft orders that gave rise to the upturn earlier in the year were not repeated; fixed investment excluding aircraft increased at about a  2  percent rate in the third quarter.

<!-- missing-text -->

Preliminary indicators for the fourth quarter suggest that growth remains strong. The average volume of  retail sales surged in October, more than offsetting a  decline in September. Spending in September had been depressed by  a  number of  special factors, including unusually low  sales in  the week leading up to the funeral of  Princess Diana. Although business sentiment weakened somewhat in November, the Purchasing Managers Survey of  manufacturers indicated that new  domestic orders rose sharply, while export orders increased moderately.

Conditions in  the labor market have continued to tighten. The official claimant unemployment rate was unchanged at 5.2 percent in October, but surveys suggest that skill shortages and recruitment difficulties have increased. Growth of  nominal earnings remains moderate. Retail prices excluding mortgage interest payments rose

2.8 percent over the year to November, remaining above the government's inflation target of 2 1/2 rcent pe for underlying inflation. Producer input prices continued to decline in  November, reflecting the strength of sterling.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Percent f  firms  expecting  utput o  increase  the ext  four onths o o t in n m minus those xpecting  utput o  decrease. e o t
- 2.  Retail prices  xcluding  ortgage  interest ments. Percent hange e m pay c from previous ear. y
- 3. Percent hange from  previous  ear. c y

In its November Inflation Report, the Bank of England noted that both output growth and inflation have turned out to be  about Yz percentage point higher than in  the central projection made for the August Report, reflecting a  surprisingly muted effect of  sterling's appreciation on  net trade, while the  impact of  the higher exchange rate on  the domestic price level has been restrained by  rising profit margins. For the first time, the Inflation Report gave the Bank's projection for real GDP growth as well as inflation over the forecast period. The Bank's central projection is for growth to fall below 2  percent in 1998, but then to pick up  somewhat in 1999. Inflation is projected to be  around the government's target rate of 2% percent. The  Monetary Policy Committee decided not to reinstate the  monitoring ranges for the MO  and M4  aggregates, which had lapsed in  May  when the Bank  was granted operational independence, noting that velocity has behaved erratically recently.

In Italy, GDP rose at a  preliminary 1.6 percent rate in  the third quarter. Although actual data on the breakdown of  expendi-

tures are not yet available, the Italian statistical agency indicated that final domestic demand growth was strong, with both household consumption and business investment contributing positively. Inventory accumulation, which contributed over 6 percentage points to second-quarter growth, slowed in  the third quarter. Preliminary data also indicated that the pass-through effects of  the highly successful auto-tax incentives continued in the third quarter.

Fourth-quarter indicators are very limited. Consumer confidence in  October and November was slightly below its thirdquarter average, but remained significantly higher than its level in the  second quarter. Business sentiment also declined in  October, reaching its lowest level since June.

Italian inflation remains low. In November, consumer prices rose 1.6 percent (yr/yr), the same rate registered in the previous month. Although the pass-through effects of  the rise in  VAT last month put upward pressure on  consumer prices in  November, they were to a  large extent offset by  a  moderation in  food and energy prices.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Level  of  index.  SA. N
- 2. Percent f  manufacturing  irms aving  favorable  iew o f h a v of business conditions nus those ith  an unfavorable  utlook. mi w o
- 3. Percent hange  from previous ear. c y

5 On  November 21, the Senate (the  upper house) approved the government's 1998 budget proposal, which includes a  total of $15 billion equivalent (or about 1 1/2  ercent p of  GDP) in  deficit cutting

measures. Roughly $3  billion of  the planned reductions arise from lower welfare spending. Under Italian law, the budget proposal, which is currently under consideration in  the lower house of  the parliament, is required to  be  approved by  the end of  December.

The Canadian economy continues to grow at  a  robust rate. Real GDP at factor cost increased at  a  4.8 percent rate in  the third quarter, with home-building and wholesale sales of  machinery and equipment showing particular strength. Most of  the third-quarter gain came in  July, however, with  monthly output growth slowing in the  August-September period. Employment growth resumed in  November, after a  pause in September-October. The unemployment rate moved back down to 9.0 percent in  November, reversing an  uptick in October, and would have moved even lower if  not for a  strong increase in the labor force. September retail sales and October housing starts also showed continued strength. Consumer price inflation slowed a  bit in October to 1.5 percent on  a  twelve-month basis, showing little evidence of immediate price pressures despite the strong economy.

Recent data on trade and the current account provide perhaps the  most significant indication of  strong Canadian domestic demand. The current account deficit widened more sharply than expected in the third quarter, to $4.6 billion, from $2.8 billion in the second quarter. The increase in  the deficit was largely due to a  decline in  the surplus on  trade in goods, as strong growth in domestic demand led to a  surge in imports, especially of  equipment and machinery. Monthly trade data showed a  steady shrinking of the trade surplus month-by-month during the third quarter, as imports grew at a  rapid clip.

The Bank of  Canada increased its key  Bank Rate 1/4 percentage point, to 4  percent, on  November 25, the third such increase this year. The Bank indicated that it  was responding to  the recent weakness in  the Canadian dollar, related to the impact of  the Asian crisis on  the prices of  commodities produced intensively in  Canada. As  measured by  the Bank's monetary conditions index, currency weakness had reversed all of  the monetary tightening put in  place with the rate hike on October 1; the Bank indicated that such an easing of  monetary conditions was not  appropriate at  this time.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Percent hange  from year  earlier. c
- 2. Level  of  index, 991 1 = 100.
- 3. Level  of  index, 977 = 1 100.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Not  seasonally adjusted.
- ...  Data  not  available on  a monthly basis.

Industrial oduction  in  Selected  Industrial untries Pr Co

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer Price Inflation  n  Selected  Industrial  ountries i C (12-month change)

<!-- missing-text -->

Economic Situation in Other Countries

Financial turmoil has shown little signs of  abating in the ASEAN region. In Korea, a  major financial crisis has erupted, prompting the government to seek international financial assistance. By  early December, downward pressures on  currencies had abated in Hong Kong, Brazil, and Argentina, but renewed pressures emerged in the  wake of  the deterioration of conditions in  Korea.

The financial turmoil in  the five major ASEAN countries has led to a  significant slowdown in growth in  the region. In contrast, growth has remained strong in  Korea, whose troubles reached crisis proportions only recently, and in Taiwan and China. Growth performance was also good in  major Latin American countries in  the third quarter. External imbalances in  the ASEAN region have narrowed as a  result of  the fall in domestic demand and currency depreciations.

ASEAN and individual country notes. In  Korea, a  serious financial crisis has erupted following several months of  mounting concern about the health of  Korean banks. Most of  Korea's major banks have heavy exposure to several large industrial conglomerates that failed earlier in  the year. In October and November, increased concern about bank solvency put the won  under strong downward pressures. By  December 2, the won  was 25 percent below its level on October 30. Over that period, the stock market fell by  25 percent to  its lowest level since May 1987, and the yield on  3  year wondenominated corporate bonds rose over 500 basis points.

On  December 3,  Korea and the IMF reached agreement on  an  IMFled assistance package that will total roughly $57 billion. The IMF will provide $21 billion in  the form of  a  three-year standby arrangement with the first $10 billion to  be  distributed in  three tranches over a  five-week period. This will be  supplemented by $10 billion from the World Bank and $4  billion from the Asian Development Bank. The United States, Japan, and other major industrial countries have also agreed to  provide over $20 billion collectively in  bilateral assistance. The assistance would be provided only as a  backup to the support from the multilateral agencies and could only be  drawn upon subject to stringent conditions. The U.S. support would come from the U.S. Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund.

The IMF plan requires, first, that Korea rapidly restructure its troubled banking sector. Weak banks will be  merged with healthier ones, and some insolvent banks will be closed. Second, it requires a  very substantial and nearly immediate opening of  the capital account. Foreign investors will be allowed to  purchase a majority stake in Korean companies and buy  Korean bonds without restriction. Third, Korea must pass legislation that grants autonomy to  the Bank of  Korea (BOK) and makes price stability its primary objective. Fourth, the BOK is required to  maintain a  tight monetary policy stance.

Financial markets have been volatile since the announcement of the program. By  December 11, the won was 34 percent below its December 2  close, while the stock price index was basically unchanged after a  rollercoaster ride. Korea will hold its presidential election on  December 18, but none of  the three candidates has articulated a  plan for resolving the current crisis.

Korea's crisis comes against the  backdrop of  a  modest pickup in  Korea's economic growth and improvement in its trade balance. The trade balance improvement has reflected in part a  depreciation of  the  Korean won against the U.S. dollar. (The  won declined by about 16 percent between March 1996 and mid-October 1997, prior to its precipitous drop that began in late October.) Inflation has remained quite low.

<!-- missing-text -->

The turmoil in  financial markets in the ASEAN region has shown little sign of  abating. Since the last Greenbook, the currencies of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand have further depreciated against the dollar and stock indices have continued to decline. In  most countries, interest rates have

remained at elevated levels. In Singapore, where interest rate increases were very modest so  far, two of  the "Big Four" banks raised their prime rates last week.

The substantial increases in interest rates since July appear to  be slowing domestic demand growth considerably in the ASEAN region. Malaysia's real GDP growth in  the third quarter was under 4 percent (s.a.a.r), its slowest pace in four years. In  the Philippines, real GDP grew by just over 2  percent (s.a.a.r) in the third quarter, a  sharp slowdown from the pace in  the first half of the  year. Singapore, however, posted robust growth in  the third quarter, boosted by strong recovery in  global electronics demand. In  Thailand, industrial production contracted sharply in the third quarter.

<!-- missing-text -->

Inflation has picked up substantially in some economies in the region, driven in large part by the substantial depreciations of their currencies. In Indonesia, inflation rose to 10 percent in November (year-over-year); a  long drought has exacerbated the inflationary pressure. Inflation has so  far remained at low levels in  Malaysia and Singapore.

<!-- missing-text -->

Trade balances improved significantly in economies in  the ASEAN region as a  result of  the substantial real depreciation of their currencies, the slowdown in their growth, and strong growth in industrialized countries (except Japan). Thailand reported balanced trade in  September, in  contrast to a  decade of  trade deficits.

<!-- missing-text -->

The response of  policymakers to the regional financial crisis has been  mixed. Progress on  Indonesia's IMF program--which got off to a  good start with the closure of some banks and with intervention boosting the rupiah--appears to  have stalled. The Philippines is struggling to complete successfully its IMF program. Thailand and Malaysia, however, have taken some action to quicken the pace of financial sector reform. On  December 7,  Thai authorities announced the closure of  56 of  the 58 suspended finance companies; this action paved the way for the IMF's release of  the second tranche of funds (about $0.8 billion) under the standby arrangement. On  December 5, Malaysia's government unveiled a  stabilization package that includes a  sharp cut in  government spending and  measures to improve financial sector disclosure standards and performance. Market reaction to the measures has been positive as the stock price index rose almost 5 percent from the day of  the announcement to December 10.

In  Hong Kong, speculative pressures on  the Hong Kong dollar had eased by  early December, but were renewed upon concerns about Korea. The  yield spread between Hong Kong government debt and U.S. Treasuries narrowed from 1150 basis points in late October to 350 basis points on December 10 at  a  one-year maturity, but the following day widened to 500 basis points. Despite the speculative pressure on the currency in late October and press reports of heavy intervention in foreign exchange markets by  the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, foreign exchange reserves actually rose in  October from the previous month. Reserves stood at $92 billion, up $4  billion from September. GDP grew 6.4 percent in the second quarter of 1997 (the latest period available) from a  year earlier.

In China, output growth has continued to moderate in 1997, while inflation has remained low. In  the first ten months of 1997, surging exports led to a  trade surplus of  nearly $36 billion, compared with a  surplus of  $8  billion in  the year-earlier period. The value of  exports rose 24 percent while the value of imports rose 4  percent from the year-earlier period. Import growth has been somewhat stronger since mid-year, with imports up 10 percent since June from the year-earlier period.

So far, China has remained relatively unaffected by  the current financial crisis in  Asia. China's exchange rate has remained stable against the U.S. dollar, while foreign exchange reserves have risen steadily: through September, foreign exchange reserves were up  $29 billion for the  year, reaching a  level of $136 billion. China's currency is not convertible on  the capital account, making a  speculative attack difficult.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  Taiwan, output has grown strongly in  recent months, while consumer prices have remained relatively flat. Strong import growth contributed to a  narrowing of  Taiwan's trade surplus in  the first eleven months of 1997 to $7.8 billion, compared with a  surplus of more than $11 billion in  the comparable period last year. Exports rose 6  percent over this period, while imports rose 12 percent.

<!-- missing-text -->

As  of  December 10, the Taiwan dollar had depreciated 12 percent against the U.S. dollar since Taiwan's authorities announced on  October 17 that they would no longer defend the currency. The stock market, which fell nearly 30 percent from mid-August to late October, had recovered nearly 20 percent as of  December 11. At  the end of  October, international reserves were $83 billion, down $3 billion from a  month earlier, and down $7  billion from their recent peak in  June.

In  Brazil, growth moderated in the third quarter, as real GDP was  up by  4.1 percent (s.a.a.r.), compared with a  whopping 14 percent growth in the second quarter. Indications are  that economic activity has slowed since late October, when the central bank raised its discount rate from 21 to 43 percent. (The  rate was subsequently lowered to 41 percent.) Inflation has continued to  be remarkably low  under the Cardoso government's 3-1/2 year-old stabilization program, the "Plano Real."

Downward pressures on  the currency, the "real," have generally eased in  recent weeks. However, at the end of  the intermeeting period, financial conditions had  begun to weaken again, apparently as a  result of  the turmoil in  Korea. Interest rates on  30-day bank CDs, which skyrocketed from 20 percent in early November to 47

percent in  mid-November, stood at  35 percent on  December 10. The Bovespa stock price index, which had plunged by  35 percent between late October and mid-November, had regained over half of  its earlier loss. Central Bank President Gustavo Franco and Finance Minister Pedro Malan have stated several times in recent weeks that the government has no intention of devaluing the "real."

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Percent-change from  previous period.
- 2.  Annual data  are  from  national income accounts.
- 3.  INPC. Percentage change from  previous period. Annual data  are  Dec/Dec.
- 4.  Billions of U.S.  dollars. NSA

5 The improvement in financial conditions followed the Cardoso government's unveiling of  a  package of  50 fiscal measures aimed at reducing the fiscal deficit by  $20 billion in 1998 (2-1/2 percent of GDP). Prospects for fiscal tightening were strengthened when the House of  Deputies approved a  constitutional amendment that would enable federal, state, and local governments to cut their payrolls.

The government hopes that fiscal austerity will also cut the current account deficit, which is expected to be  about 4  percent of GDP in 1997 and has fueled downward pressures on the "real." The cumulative trade deficit for the year through November was $9  billion, up considerably from a  deficit of  about $2  billion over the same period last year. Imports grew 25 percent over the period, while exports grew 10 percent.

In  Argentina, economic activity continues to  display strength. Industrial production rose 13 percent in  October from its year-ago level, and real GDP grew by  8.6 percent in  the third quarter from a year ago. Despite this, inflation remains non-existent. The stronger output growth has led to a  trade deficit of  over $2  billion

through September this year, compared with a  surplus of $1.6 billion over the same period in 1996.

Since the eruption of the currency crisis in  Asia in late October, Argentine financial markets have experienced considerable turmoil. In  the first few days of  the crisis, the Argentine Central Bank lost about $1  billion in foreign currency (roughly 5  percent of reserves excluding gold), but reserves recovered in  a  short time and stood at just over $19 billion at the end of  November, roughly the same level as at end-September. Total bank deposits from October 19 to  November 19 actually grew by  2.5 percent, but peso-denominated deposits fell 3  percent, indicating a  modest shift toward dollardenominated deposits. The blue-chip Merval index fell some 30 percent from October 23 to November 12, when it reached a  low-point for the year. Although it subsequently recovered much of its earlier losses, stock prices were dragged significantly down again this week by  declines in  world market.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Percentage  hange  from  previous  eriod. c p
- 2.  Unemployment  figures  vailable ly  in May  and October a on of each  year.  The annual  figure  s the verage  of  the i a two surveys.
- 3.  Billions   U.S. dollars. of

A  major impact on  Argentina of  developments in  Asia since late October has been high interest rates.  The  call  oney  rate ose  from m r 6.5 percent in late ctober to a peak of 13  percent  in  early O November  and  since hen  has fallen  o  about 9  percent. Over this t t period, the peso-dollar deposit spread on  30-day deposits rose from about 50  basis points to  a  peak of  700 basis points, and has since fallen to 300 basis points. Argentine Brady bond spreads have displayed a  similar pattern of  movement.

After several months of  discussions, the  Argentine government has reached agreement on  an IMF $2.8 billion Extended Fund Facility. The  program will follow the current stand-by, which will expire at the end of  this year. All performance criteria have been met.

Mexico's economy showed unexpected strength in  the third quarter as real GDP rose 8.1 percent above its year-earlier level, or about 2  percent on a  seasonally adjusted basis from the second quarter (not  annual rate). The robust economy was mirrored in  an even stronger showing for industrial production, and continued the rapid expansion registered earlier in  the year. Recently, growth has  become more broadly based. While manufactures, the focus of recovery after the 1995 recession, have continued to expand, output in the construction and service sectors also have grown strongly in the  third quarter. Largely reflecting the rebound in domestic demand, the trade balance continued to  deteriorate in recent months, leading to a  correspondent widening of  the current account deficit. However, inflation has remained subdued, with upticks in September. and  November largely reflecting seasonal factors.

<!-- missing-text -->

Mexican financial markets appear to have stabilized following the turmoil that was triggered by  the sharp decline of the  Hong Kong stock market at the end of  October and its spillover into markets in other regions. The  peso value of  the dollar, after rising to over 8.4 at the end of  October, has since returned to about 8.1 in recent

trading, only 5  percent more depreciated than its mid-October level. At  the most recent Treasury auction, 28-day interest r  tes registered 19.3 percent, still about 200 basis points above their mid-October level, but below their recent peak of  21.2 percent on November 11. Additionally, spreads on  Mexican Brady bonds, adjusted for collateral, have declined to about 440  basis points from their recent peak of  600 basis points on November 12.

In  Venezuela, the recent pick-up in economic activity continues. The economy grew by  4  percent in  the first half of  this year, and recent data on  automobile sales and electricity usage indicate that this growth is continuing. The upward trend in recent months in inflation was reversed slightly in  November. The growth in economic activity has led to  an increase in imports, and the nonoil trade deficit has widened to $5  billion through September this year, compared with $3.6 billion over the same period in 1996. International reserves (excluding gold) stood at $15 billion at the end of November, about 25 percent higher than a  year ago and roughly the same as at end-September. As a  fallout of  the Asian situation, the Caracas stock index has displayed considerable volatility and on net  has fallen 20 percent since late October.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  Russia, the most recent available macroeconomic indicators continue little changed. In  October, output remained slightly above its year-earlier level and inflation continued to decline, dropping below 13 percent on  a  12-month basis.

Financial markets have come under substantial pressure over the  past month, reflecting spillover from financial market turmoil

in Asia as well as  concerns  over  the  course of macroeconomic policy in Russia. The ruble has  come under heavy selling pressure,

According to Central Bank Chairman

Dubinin, total reserves  (gold and  foreign exchange) declined  nearly $5 billion  in November to $18  billion. The existence of restrictions which prevent some foreign holders  of ruble assets  from immediately converting them into foreign currency--imposing a delay of a month-suggest  that the November  selling pressure may be  reflected in further reserve losses  in December. On November 10,  the central bank moved to  support the  ruble by  raising its main lending  rate by 7 percentage points to  28  percent.  On December 3, the central  bank indicated that this  rate would be adjusted up further,  in line with the rise in market rates. Equity prices, which had risen very sharply earlier  in the year, have fallen by over one-third  on average from their peak levels of October.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  Billions  of U.S. dollars.

Recent political developments have raised questions over the future course of economic  policy. A  scandal  over a book contract has  led to  the dismissal  of several key economic  reformers  from their  government positions,  including the loss by First Deputy Prime Minister Chubais of his position as  finance minister. President Yeltsin has  suggested that there may be further personnel changes if his  promise to  pay all  government wage arrears by the end of the year is  not met.  (This goal  appears very unlikely, given the large size of these arrears--about $2 billion--and the continued

substantial shortfall of  tax receipts.) This apparent disarray in the government's policymaking apparatus has emboldened the opposition-controlled parliament to delay consideration of  the government's proposed 1998 budget and key economic reform measures, including tax reform.