Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS III - FOMC

January 31, 1997

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND  FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of  Governors of the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Real GDP

Real GDP is estimated to  have increased at  a  4.7 percent annual rate in  the fourth quarter of 1996. Final sales to domestic purchasers rose at  a  2.8 percent annual rate. Consumer spending rebounded, increasing at  a  3.4 percent rate after rising only fractionally in  the third quarter. However, business fixed investment slowed sharply; although outlays for nonresidential structures surged at a  22.5 percent annual rate, spending for producers' durable equipment edged down. Government purchases were about unchanged in the fourth quarter, with declines in both the federal defense and nondefense areas offset by  continued moderate growth in purchases by  state and local governments.

The external sector--where the December merchandise trade figures and other information have yet to  become available--added importantly to  overall real GDP. Real exports of goods and services are estimated to  have surged at  a  25.5 percent annual rate. Unusually large gains were reported for both agricultural and nonagricultural goods. At  the same time, imports grew at  a  moderate 4.7 percent rate, held down by  a  sharp decline in  oil imports.

The pace of inventory investment--which is estimated largely from data through November--is reported to  have declined only slightly from that in  the third quarter. Stocks of  motor vehicles declined a  bit, and retail inventories are estimated to  have moved up  only slightly after a  large increase in  the third quarter. However, inventory accumulation by  manufacturers and wholesalers is estimated to  have been somewhat greater than in  the prior quarter.

Real disposable personal income increased at a  2.5 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, just under its pace earlier in the year. With the upswing in consumer spending, the personal saving rate dipped to 5.1 percent last quarter; the saving rate averaged 4.9 percent in 1996 compared with 4.7 percent in 1995.

On inflation, the chain-weighted price index for gross domestic product rose at a  1.8 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, a bit below the pace that prevailed over the first three quarters of the year. Although the price index for gross domestic purchases accelerated somewhat as a  result of  the pickup in consumer energy

prices, falling export prices damped the rise in  the overall product price index.

BEA's estimate for real GDP growth last quarter was 1-1/4 percentage point above our forecast in  the January Greenbook. Real export growth was stronger than  we  had anticipated; while nominal trade flows were in line with our reading of  the incoming data, we  were surprised by the 2-1/4 percent (annual rate) drop in export prices. Furthermore, the decline in residential investment last quarter was much smaller than we  had expected: In  the third quarter, BEA's estimates for residential investment had been surprisingly low  based on the pattern of  housing starts, and we  did not anticipate the prompt return to  the path of spending that is implicit in  the advance estimate. Together, the surprises in exports and residential investment accounted for about half of our miss on overall GDP. The remainder of our underestimate reflected smaller errors in our forecasts for expenditures on consumer durables, nonresidential construction, and motor vehicle inventories.

The 1-3/4 percent annual rate increase in  the GDP chain price index last quarter was  well below the 2-1/2 percent pace projected in  the January Greenbook. The miss in GDP prices largely is attributable to unexpected movements in  the prices of exports and, to a  lesser extent, imports; the price index for gross domestic purchases increased at  a  2-1/2 percent pace, in line with  the Greenbook projection.

Although a  good many of  the source data for the fourth quarter, particularly the December readings for inventories and net exports, have yet to  be released, we  do not feel that BEA has made any unreasonable assumptions for the  missing information. Accordingly, at this juncture, we  have no statistical basis on  which to expect a large revision to  the advance estimate.

We shall make a  more complete reassessment of the forecast when all of the detail underlying BEA's estimates becomes available on Monday. But our tentative reading of  the data in  hand leads us to anticipate that, in  most sectors, we'll simply be adjusting the forecasted levels of spending to reflect the fourth-quarter surprises and leaving the projected growth rate of  activity from here little changed. The elevation of  the level of activity is small and is unlikely to imply a  significant change in  inflationary pressures from what was projected in  the Greenbook.

Consumer Sentiment

Based on  the full sample tabulations, the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment rose slightly in  January, remaining at  the upper end of  the favorable range that has prevailed since early 1994. Respondents expressed more favorable views of  business conditions in the next twelve months, as well as more positive views of  buying conditions for large household appliances. Other components of  the overall index declined somewhat, but generally remained in  very positive ranges. On  balance, the upbeat attitudes reversed the slight decline in  the overall index registered in  the preliminary report.

Among questions not included in  the overall index, the results were also upbeat. The index of  car buying conditions advanced strongly, and the index of  home buying conditions also rose, with more households reporting that now  is a  good time to  buy because "times are good." The expected change in  unemployment in  the next year moved up, but stayed in the favorable range that has prevailed since last summer.

The median value of  expected inflation over the coming year was unchanged at 3 percent, while the mean shifted up 0.2 percentage point to  4.1 percent. The mean and median values of  expected inflation over the next five to ten  years moved up 0.1 percentage point to 4.0 percent and 3.1 percent, respectively. Errata

The projections for industrial production (IP) and capacity utilization shown in  Part 1  of the Greenbook did not reflect the new aggregation methods. The corrected forecast is shown below:

<!-- missing-text -->

Real  Gross  Domestic  Product and  Related  Items

(Percent  change from previous  period  at  compound annual rates;

based on seasonally  adjusted  data,  chain-type ndexes) i

<!-- missing-text -->

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

*  --Indicates the question is one  of  the five equally-weighted components of the index of sentiment.

Note: Figures on financial, business, and buying conditions are  the percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the percent reporting 'bad  times' (or 'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to fall.

THE FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on  Bank Lending Practices-Correction

Complete results of  the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices now  show respondents' willingness to  make consumer installment loans to  be essentially unchanged over the last three months. Preliminary results discussed in  Part 2  of  the Greenbook (pp. III-7 and III-A-2) had suggested a  slight decline.

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations M 1

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day  quotes xcept s  noted. e a
- 2.  Average  for wo-week reserve  aintenance eriod losest  o  date hown.  Last  observation  he verage  for aintenance eriod nding  January 9, t m p c t s ist a m p e 2 1997.
- 3. Secondary  market.
- 4. Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t 1 a.m. ondon time. f E d a 1 L
- 5. Most  recent  bservation  ased  on  one-day hursday  quote nd  futures rket  index  changes. o b T a ma
- 6.  Merrill  ynch Master I  high-yield nd index  composite. L I bo
- 7.  Quotes  for eek ending  Friday revious  o  date hown. w p t s
- *  Figures  ited  re s  of he lose n  December 16. c a a t c o