Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS III - FOMC

December 12, 1997

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of Governors of  the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL

ECONOMY

Producer Prices

The PPI for finished goods moved down 0.2 percent last month, and the index excluding food and energy edged down 0.1 percent. Over the twelve months ended in  November, the core PPI rose just 0.3 percent, about 1/4 percentage point less than its increase over the prior year.

The price index for finished foods edged down 0.1 percent in November and is down 1-1/4 percent over the past year. Among specific items, coffee prices continued to decline last month, after having risen considerably earlier this year. At  the crude level, food prices have dropped 6-1/2 percent over the past year. Although we  still think that the CPI for food might have blipped up in November, the risks of  persistent pressures in  the food area do  not seem to  be  large in  the near term.

Finished energy prices moved down 0.8 percent in  November. Gasoline prices fell considerably for a second month, and refiners' margins dropped back from their elevated levels of early autumn. Prices of residential electricity--about half of  the energy index-also fell last month; electricity prices have been unusually volatile of late but  are about unchanged, on  average, over the past four months. However, natural gas prices continued to rise in November, as concerns about supply adequacy continued into the early part of  the month. Nevertheless, spot prices are down since midNovember and  may point to some easing in wholesale gas prices in December. Overall, the index for finished energy is 3-1/2 percent below its year-earlier level.

Prices of finished consumer goods other than food and energy ticked down 0.1 percent in  November. News on  motor vehicle prices has been particularly favorable. Prices for new cars and light trucks both moved down last  month, and both are down between 1  and 2  percentage points over the past year. Elsewhere, apparel prices turned up, offsetting their declines of September and October while other prices were little changed last month.

Prices of  capital equipment edged down 0.1 percent in  November. In  addition to  the decline in  light vehicle prices, computer prices were down 2-1/2 percent after showing no change in  October. This price swing reflected movements in  prices of  mid-range machines; the

index for personal computers was down at about the same rate in  both months.

At earlier stages of  processing, the PPI for intermediate materials other than food and energy inched up in  November and stood 1/2 percent higher than a  year earlier. Prices for crude materials other than food and energy declined last month and are up 1-1/2 percent over the past twelve months.

Consumer Sentiment

According to the preliminary report, the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment retreated 4.2 index points in  early December from the historical high posted in November; nonetheless, the value of the index in early December remained at a  very high level. Households reported less favorable views of  their personal finances in  the past year, expected business conditions in the next year and in the next five years, and of  buying conditions for large appliances. In contrast, their views of  personal finances in  the next twelve months held steady in  early December.

Among questions not included in  the overall index, the index of car buying conditions declined in early December, as did the index of  house buying conditions; nonetheless, both indexes remained well within the favorable ranges that have prevailed in the past two years. The expected change in  unemployment over the next year rose in early December, reaching to its highest level since April.

The mean value of  expected inflation over the coming year rose 0.1 percentage point to 3.5 percent, while the median held steady at 2.9 percent. The  mean value of  expected inflation over the next five to  ten years rose 0.3 percentage point to 4.1 percent, while the  median edged up 0.1 percent to 3.2 percent.

Business Inventories

Excluding the stocks held by auto dealers, retail inventories edged down $2.5 billion (annual rate) in  October on a  book-value basis, and the inventory-sales ratio for non-auto retailers remained at 1.42 months.

For all manufacturing and trade excluding motor vehicles, inventories rose at a  $42.7 billion annual rate in  October, a  touch faster than the average increase in  the third quarter. With total nonvehicle shipments and sales in  manufacturing and trade up 0.4 percent in October, the inventory-sales ratio for this aggregate remained at 1.33 months.

CPI AND PPI INFLATION RATES (Percent change)

<!-- missing-text -->

UNIVERSITY OF  MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

- * --Indicates the  question is one of the five equally-weighted components of the index of  sentiment.

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and  buying conditions are the percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the percent reporting 'bad  times' (or 'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is  the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to fall, plus 100.

Consumer Surveys

Consumer Sentiment

<!-- missing-text -->

Current  Conditions

<!-- missing-text -->

Expected Conditions

<!-- missing-text -->

CHANGES IN  MANUFACTURING

AND  TRADE INVENTORIES

(Billions of  dollars at annual rates;

based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

SELECTED INVENTORY-SALES RATIOS

(Months' supply, based on  Census book-value data, seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Inventory-Sales Ratios,  by Major Sector

Manufacturing

(Book value)

<!-- missing-text -->

Wholesale Excluding  Motor Vehicles

<!-- missing-text -->

Retail

<!-- missing-text -->

Selected inancial  arket Quotations' F M

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day  quotes xcept s  noted. e a
- 2.  Average  for wo-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest  o ate hown.  Last bservation   the verage o ate or aintenance eriod nding t m p c t d s o is a t d f m p e December 17,1997.

- 5. Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t  11 a.m.  London time. f E d a
- 6. Most  recent bservation  ased  on one-day hursday  quote nd futures rket  index  changes. o b T a ma
- 7. Merrill  ynch Master  II  high-yield nd  index omposite. L bo c
- 8.  Quotes  for eek ending  Friday revious  o  date hown. w p t s
- * Figures  ited  re  as f he  close  n  November  10,  1997. c a o t o