Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CLASS III

FOMC

August 15, 1997

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for  the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of  Governors of  the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY Michigan (SRC) Survey of Consumer Attitudes

According to the preliminary report, the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment fell back in  August, but it remained at an extremely favorable level after recording historical highs in June and July. Indeed, despite less favorable assessments of  their current financial situations and expected business conditions, those components of  the index in early August remained generally above the levels during the first five months of  the year. Respondents' views on  their personal financial situations over the next 12 months were unchanged in early August. Only households' opinions of  buying conditions for large appliances dropped below the favorable level that prevailed earlier this year.

Among questions not included in  the overall index, the index of expected unemployment change moved back up  in  August but remained relatively low. Reported unhappiness with prices led  to the second straight monthly decline in  assessments of  buying conditions for cars. However, favorable views on  mortgage rates provided a  further boost to appraisals of  buying conditions for new  homes. Households' willingness to use savings or credit to finance a  major purchase slipped somewhat in  early August.

The mean of  expected inflation over the next 12 months fell 0.2 percentage point to 3.2 percent; however, the median rose 0.1 percentage point in  August to 2.8 percent. The  mean of expected inflation over the next 5  to 10 years jumped 0.4 percentage point to 3.8 percent while the median moved up from 2.9 to 3  percent.

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF  CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

- *  --Indicates the question is one of  the five equally-weighted components of the index of sentiment.

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and  buying conditions are the  percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the percent reporting 'bad  times' (or  'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to  fall, plus 100.

N

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations' M

(Percent  xcept  as  noted) e

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day  quotes xcept s  noted. e a
- 2.  Average  for wo-week reserve  aintenance  period losest   date hown.  Last bservation   the  average o ate or aintenance eriod nding t m c to s o is t d f m p e August  20,  1997.

- 4. Bid rates  or urodollar  eposits  t  11 a.m.  London time. f E d a
- 5.  Most  recent  bservation  ased  on one-day hursday  quote nd futures  arket  index hanges. o b T a m c
- 6. Merrill  ynch Master L 1 high-yield  ond  index omposite. b c
- 7. Quotes  for eek ending riday  previous  o  date hown. w F t s
- * Figures  ited  re s  of he lose  n July  1,1997. c a a t c o