Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Strictly nfidential  FR) Co ( Class I I FOMC

Part 1

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Summary and  Outlook

Prepared for  the Federal Open Market Committee

By the  staff  f  the Board  of  Governors of  the Federal Reserve  System o

May 16, 1996

Strictly  nfidential  FR) Class II  OMC Co ( F

May  16, 1996

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

BOARD OF  GOVERNORS OF  THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM DIVISION OF  RESEARCH AND STATISTICS

<!-- missing-text -->

Date:

May 16, 1996

To:

Greenbook Part 1 readers

From:

Mike  Prell

Subject:

Changes  in  the  May edition

In this edition of Part 1,  we  have eliminated the former domestic financial section and integrated some of that material into what formerly was the domestic nonfinancial section and is now  titled "Domestic Developments." In the process, we  think we have eliminated ome  unproductive edundancy that s r existed mong a the old Part 1 and Part 2  financial sections and the Bluebook. We  undertook this change with the notion that we  would reverse course if  we found it  didn't work; we're satisfied at this point, but please let me  know if you feel otherwise.

Incidentally, we  are also seeking to lighten your load by streamlining Part 2  a  bit, leaving out some less essential material.  We hope that e  have not left w out anything  to  which you had become  attached.  Again, let  me  know  if  you  have any problems with what has been done.

Overview

Earlier this year, a  number of  analysts were drafting obituaries for the economic expansion. The prevailing expectation was that there would be  several more cuts in  the federal funds rate, and the yield on  the long Treasury bond was heading below 6  percent. The obituaries have been shelved: The cyclical upswing is now widely perceived to  have entered its sixth year with considerable forward thrust, and renewed market concerns about inflationary pressures--and Fed responses--have been reflected in  a  run-up in bond yields that briefly lifted the thirty-year rate above 7 percent for the first time since last spring.

We  did not subscribe to the previous recession scenario, and we also think the swing in  sentiment to  the other side may be exaggerated. But  we don't dismiss the fears of inflation pressures entirely. We  have thought for some time that the economy is operating without a  broad cushion of  untapped resources to absorb inflationary shocks. With real GDP apparently having increased at a 2-1/2 percent annual rate in the first quarter, and on  track to  meet or beat that gain in the second, labor markets remain tight. Add to this the adverse developments in agricultural and energy markets, stir in  possible governmental action like a hike in  the minimum wage, and the potential for a  substantial deterioration in consumer price trends is readily apparent.

At this stage, however, we  have made only a mild alteration to our baseline forecast. Thanks in  part to the run-up in  bond yields, we  are still projecting a moderation of real GDP growth after the current quarter, and we continue to  expect that the unemployment rate will remain near 5-1/2 percent. Such a  pattern of resource utilization probably would in itself imply only a  gradual acceleration in  wages and prices. However, in light of  the deterioration in  the food and energy price picture, we have raised our forecast of overall CPI inflation to 3.3 percent, on  average, in  1996 and 1997--1/4 percentage point more than in  the March Greenbook and 1/2 percentage point above the 1995 pace. The inflation outlook would be still worse had we incorporated the enactment of a  minimum wage increase in this projection; recognizing the obvious risk in  that regard, we have included a  brief analysis

of the effects of  a  rise in the  wage floor at the end of this section.

Key Background Factors in  the Forecast

We  have retained our assumption that the federal funds rate will be held at or near 5-1/4 percent at least well into 1997. Against the backdrop of  higher inflation in this forecast, this should be  perceived as implying a  slightly lower real funds rate than before. Although we  had previously thought that long-term rates would back up as the solidity of  the expansion became apparent and some speculative positions were unwound, the recent rise has outstripped our expectation. In light of  the more inflationary cast of  the current projection, we  have carried forward the rate surprise. Thus, we  anticipate that bond yields will continue to fluctuate in  the higher range observed since the last FOMC meeting.

Meanwhile, equity prices have risen further, on  net, since midMarch and thus are somewhat higher than we  had expected in the last Greenbook. The ability of the bull market to  sustain itself in the face of  such a  sharp run-up in  bond yields would seem remarkable at first blush. One obvious factor is the continuation of  favorable corporate earnings reports. But we  believe that there is some froth in  the market, and we  view overall share valuations as a  bit rich relative to "fundamentals." Consequently, we  have again allowed for a  small price correction in coming months--to be  followed by  a recovery in 1997. Still, given where the  market is now, equity prices are higher on average in  this forecast than in  the last.

Neither real short-term nor long-term interest rates seem particularly high by  the standards of  the past decade and a  half. Moreover, the recent performance of the economy may have bolstered the confidence of households and businesses that might be considering making major purchases. With equity financing readily available for  both young and established firms, and with banks maintaining an accommodative lending posture, we see financial conditions as posing no impediment to continued solid growth in spending.

On  the fiscal front, our policy assumptions remain essentially unchanged. We  are anticipating that discretionary spending will be held in  check in  fiscal 1997, keeping such outlays $10 billion below the levels implied by  allowing fiscal 1996 spending to grow with inflation: we  have not assumed the reduction in the gasoline tax now under consideration in the Congress. This path would not imply any

incremental restraint beyond that imposed in  the current fiscal year by the series of  actions that was completed by  the passage last month of  the Omnibus Appropriations Act.

The incoming news on the federal budget deficit has been extremely favorable. We now expect that the deficit will total "only" $121 billionin fiscal 1996 and $158 billion in fiscal 1997; the projections in the  March Greenbook were $160 billion and $192 billion. The surprise has been in receipts, where corporate payments in  March and nonwithheld individual payments in  April were both well above expectations: in addition, refunds in  the closing weeks of  the tax filing season were lower than we  had anticipated. 1 Moreover, corporate profits appear to be on  a substantially higher track than we  forecast in  March; the higher profits, in  turn, provide a  further boost to our projection of corporate tax revenues. Finally, we  have raised our estimate of the proceeds from auctioning portions of  the broadcast spectrum $4 billion in 1996 and $10 billion in 1997; this revision reflects both a  higher estimate of auction bids and the shift to the new CBO/OMB budget accounting method for recording such 2 transactions.

With respect to the external sector, the trade-weighted dollar in  terms of other G-10 currencies has risen about 2  percent, on  net. since March, and we  assume that it  will remain near recent levels through the end of 1997. The outlook for foreign economic activity is about the same as in the last Greenbook, with real GDP (on a  U.S. export-weighted basis) projected to increase about 3-1/2 percent per year in 1996 and 1997, compared with an  increase of less than 2  percent in 1995. Reflecting recent market developments, we  have raised the projection for oil prices: We  now expect the spot price of  WTI crude to average about $22 per  barrel this quarter, $2-1/2 higher than in  the March Greenbook. The spot price has fallen appreciably since peaking at $25 in  mid-April and currently

stands at around $21; it is expected to drift down to $19.50 by  the end of the  third quarter and to remain around that level through 1997, about $1  higher than in our previous forecast.

Recent Developments and the Prospects for the Current Quarter

Updating BEA's advance first-quarter estimate as  best as  we can in light of the more recent source data, real GDP appears to have grown a bit less than the published figure of  2.8 percent--perhaps in the vicinity of 2-1/2 percent. The important March figure on the U.S. trade balance is still to come. But the key point almost certainly will remain the same: The economy achieved a  quite respectable gain in  the face of  the January blizzard and the March GM  strike. Moreover, that growth involved a  hefty gain in  household and business spending, while inventories were little changed in the aggregate.

<!-- missing-text -->

Coming off that first-quarter performance, the odds favor another solid advance in  the current period. Our point estimate for GDP growth is 3.5 percent, but the paucity of data makes the assessment very tentative. A  reason for caution is the ambiguity of recent labor market data. According to  the published figures. aggregate hours of private production workers last month were substantially above the first-quarter average; however, after making a  crude adjustment for the effects of  the blizzard on the January reading, we  estimate that hours in  April were little changed from the first-quarter average. On  the other hand, the lower level of initial claims of late points to appreciable employment growth.

Looking further at the production side of the ledger, rebounding auto output will result in  a  sizable gain in industrial activity this quarter. IP rose about 1  percent in  April and with small increments in May and June would rise at  a  5  percent annual rate for the quarter: as a  whole, after having increased 2-1/2 percent in  the  "first quarter.

The major pieces of expenditure information now in  hand for the current quarter relate mainly to the household sector. The advance report on retail sales in  April indicates that real outlays for nonautomotive consumer goods were 3/4 percent (not annualized) above the upward-revised first-quarter average. Unit sales of light motor vehicles dropped last month--with the decline exaggerated by reporting anomalies and a  payback after a  first-quarter boost from incentives. Together, these data suggest that real PCE may be growing somewhere between 2  percent and 3 percent (annual rate) this quarter, after having risen an  estimated 4  percent in  the first quarter.

The increase in  mortgage rates over the past few  months has as yet had no perceptible effect on  construction activity: Singlefamily starts and permits both rose considerably in  April. And although we are anticipating declines in  starts in  May and June, real residential investment should post another sizable gain this quarter.

Real business fixed investment appears likely to decelerate noticeably in the near term--although continuing to grow well in excess of overall GDP. The recent data on  orders and production suggest that shipments of nondefense capital goods will be strong this quarter, but a  repetition of the double-digit jump in real purchases of  producers' durables probably is not in the cards. And the weakening of  contracts points to a  slowing in  the advance of investment in  nonresidential structures.

In the public sector, current-quarter data are sparse, but-looking at the special factors behind the first-quarter gyrations-total government expenditures on  consumption and investment seem likely to rise slightly in real terms. State and local purchases should increase considerably from their weather-depressed firstquarter level. In contrast, federal purchases are expected to reverse the fluky surge of  the first quarter. A  strict translation of  the appropriations legislation might imply an  even steeper drop in federal expenditures than we've forecast, but the projected

decline is muted by an unwinding of the effects on  first-quarter spending of the blizzard and the government shutdown.

In the external sector, real exports are projected to  rebound after an  unusually small increase in  the first quarter, while real imports are expected to post another robust gain, boosted in part by efforts to rebuild oil inventories. On  balance, real net exports are expected to edge down, after having dropped markedly in  the first quarter--a plus for GDP growth.

The other major positive swing expected in  the current quarter is a  pickup in  inventory investment. Motor vehicle stocks plummeted in  the first quarter, and current production schedules should at least stabilize inventories. Motor vehicle output is expected to add 1 percentage point to GDP growth after having subtracted 1/2 point in the first quarter. Outside of motor vehicles, the rate of accumulation in the first quarter was higher than we  would think sustainable, and efforts to trim stocks in some sectors should yield a  slower pace of investment--but not enough of  a  drop to offset the boost from the auto sector.

We  have raised the forecast for the increase in the total CPI to an annual rate of more than 4  percent in the current quarter, about 3/4 percentage point above our previous projection. Almost all of the revision is in energy prices, which surged in  April and, judging from surveys of gasoline prices, are rising further in  May. Our forecast of  the increase in the CPI excluding food and energy remains at 2-3/4 percent, as  we anticipate a  return to  monthly increases of roughly a  quarter percent after the 0.1 percent rise in April.

The Longer-Range Outlook for the Economy

After averaging 3 percent at an annual rate in the first half of 1996, growth in real GDP is projected to run generally a  shade above 2  percent through 1997--paralleling the expansion of  potential output. Although the buoyancy of  the stock market does suggest some upside risk, we  expect domestic final demand to moderate as a  result of the recent rise in long-term interest rates and the absence of accelerator effects that might drive additions to capacity. Moreover, while better economic growth in other industrial countries will tend to bolster exports, the  high U.S. propensity to import will inhibit improvement in our trade balance. Basically, our longer-range forecast continues to  be shaped by the sense that there

are no major forces in view that would push the economy persistently away from trend growth.

It is, of  course, arguable that the updrift in  inflation that we  have forecast does itself signal an imbalance that could have adverse consequences for the economy. We  have not assumed a monetary policy tightening to curb the acceleration in prices. To be sure, some of the  predicted pickup in  inflation is the result of what might be  one-time shocks. However, preventing those impulses from embedding themselves in expectations and otherwise worsening the ongoing inflation trend presumably would require some temporary weakening of activity. The econometric simulations reported at the end of the section go some way  in addressing that policy issue.

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer spending. Consumer spending appears to be  back on track after a weak performance in late 1995; we  expect it to grow at about a  2-1/2 percent rate over the next year-and-a-half. This spending path would essentially mirror the trend in income, and the saving rate would average 4-1/2 percent in  both 1996 and 1997, the same as in 1995.

Outlays for durables should be  the strongest component of spending, extending the longstanding uptrend in  the share of durables in total real PCE. Declining relative prices and the availability of innovative products will continue to lift demand for home electronic equipment and software products, especially. However, we see little prospect for further growth in sales of  light motor vehicles. Indeed, the 14-3/4 million unit pace we  are

forecasting for coming quarters is a  shade below the average thus far this year, which we believe was lifted above trend by  larger incentives and perhaps by  the  burst of  mortgage refinancings.

Our consumption projection balances a  number of  considerations. On the plus side, consumer sentiment measures are quite positive, and the recent strengthening in consumer demand suggests that the effects of  the stock market rally may finally be showing through. Looking ahead, we  have assumed a  slight further boost to consumption from stock market wealth, but a  response more in line with some econometric estimates would significantly augment the predicted growth of spending. Meanwhile, as noted in the last Greenbook, the list of factors cited as possibly raising desired saving is long and includes such itemsas concerns about retirement income and medical coverage. The most frequently mentioned negative for spending is debt burdens. Higher levels of indebtedness may constrain effective demand, but we  think their role will be  a  minor one because--even with increased delinquencies and defaults--consumer lending is sufficiently profitable that banks and other institutions will not sharply curb credit availability.

Residential investment. Although it is not yet apparent in the data, we  believe that the rise in  mortgage rates will prompt a downturn in  homebuilding. The decline should be  moderate, however, because cash-flow affordability remains relatively high by  the standards of  the past couple of decades and because we  expect employment and income conditions to remain supportive. Singlefamily starts are projected to peak this quarter at a  1.18 million unit annual rate and then to slide to between 1.05 and 1.10 million units in the second half of this year; our projection for 1997 has single-family starts in the lower part of that range. Meanwhile, we see multifamily starts remaining in the neighborhood of 300,000 units per year. The predicted 1996-97 average pace of  total starts is about 1.4 million units, about the same as in  the past two years.

Business fixed investment. The incoming data for BFI have generally been stronger than we  had expected, and our analysis of that surprise has led us to raise our forecast for coming quarters. As a  result, we  now expect investment growth in 1996 to match the 1995 gain of 6-3/4 percent, with a  deceleration to 4-1/2 percent next year.

The upward revision to BFI is concentrated in expenditures on equipment, which are now projected to grow 8  percent in 1996, little

different than the increase in 1995, and 5-1/2 percent in 1997. General cyclical considerations--such as accelerator effects--argue for some deceleration in  capital spending; in  manufacturing, the rate of plant utilization has fallen to around the long-term average, and the pace of  investment has already risen to a  level consistent with substantial capacity growth. Our  expectation is that spending on more traditional machinery and equipment will be virtually flat, but the rapid pace of product innovation and declining prices of  computers and communications gear will continue to produce strong gains in real outlays for these items. In particular, we  are projecting that real computer investment will grow at a  pace of roughly 15 percent to 20 percent over coming quarters. Though impressive on  the face of  it, this rate pales by comparison with recent experience, and the risks in our forecast could well have an  upside bias. Notably, many industry analysts expect even larger gains as businesses acquire the state-of-the-art equipment needed to take full advantage of  popular new software and opportunities for information transfer.

Our forecast for nonresidential construction is essentially the same as last time--with growth slowing from 5  percent in 1995 to 3  percent in 1996 and to 1/2 percent in 1997. To be sure, contracts are pointing down, but we anticipate a  relatively soft landing for the sector. We have not seen the kind of construction boom that led to  busts in  the past, and vacancy rates were still falling and rents firming in some segments of  the market in  early 1996. In addition, financing for commercial construction reportedly remains abundant, although banks report some further snugging of underwriting standards in the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.

Business inventories. As  noted, we expect inventory investment to pick up somewhat in the current quarter as a  positive swing in motor vehicle stocks more than offsets a  slowing in the pace of accumulation elsewhere. Looking ahead, we expect little further change in  motor vehicle stocks, while accumulation elsewhere increases only modestly from its predicted second-quarter pace. This would be consistent with a  slight decrease in the aggregate stock-sales ratio, which seems reasonable in light of the continuing efforts of firms to minimize inventory expense.

Government. Although, as  we've seen recently, federal consumption and investment expenditures can move erratically from quarter to quarter, the  basic direction currently is one of

significant decline. As spending returns to the trend dictated by appropriations, real purchases are likely to fall at an  annual rate of close to 5  percent in  the near term and then about 3-1/2 percent in 1997. Defense "and  nondefense purchases are expected to shrink at similar rates.

The financial position of the state and local sector still appears to  be relatively healthy on  the whole. Thus, we  expect these governments to  keep real purchases on a  moderate uptrend, with growth rates for  1996 and 1997 averaging around 2-1/4 percent per year. The sector should continue to run sizable surpluses in its operating accounts.

External sector. The firming of economic activity abroad should provide considerable impetus to real export growth in 1996. However, imports are projected to rise even faster than exports, in part because of the improvement in  U.S. economic activity. On  net, the trade sector is expected to directly reduce real GDP growth about 1/2 percentage point this year. In 1997, exports are expected to grow a  bit faster than imports, and thus the external sector is a roughly neutral influence, on net, on  U.S. real GDP growth. (A fuller discussion of  these developments is contained in the International Developments section.)

Labor markets. The labor market data for the past several months have been bounced around by  weather and other distortions. But looking ahead, we expect key labor market variables between now and the end of 1997 to follow patterns consistent with an economy growing at about its potential rate. In particular, we  expect the gains in  nonfarm payroll employment to slow from a  relatively rapid 165,000 per month so far this year to about 110,000 per month, on average. As for productivity, we expect output per hour in the nonfarm business sector to rise a  bit more than 1  percent, on average, in 1996 and 1997.3 The labor force participation rate

is expected to rise only marginally, and unemployment is projected to remain around its current 5-1/2 percent level.

Wages and prices. The general theme of the inflation forecast is the same as that in the March Greenbook--namely. with resource utilization projected to remain near current levels, wages and prices are likely to show some tendency to accelerate. However, with the shade higher level of  economic activity in  the current forecast and the recent adverse developments in the food and energy sectors, we  have nudged up the projected inflation rates.

<!-- missing-text -->

The increase in  hourly compensation in the first quarter, as measured by  the employment cost index for private industry, was 2.9 percent at an annual rate, a  rise consistent with our expectations and about the same as the increase in 1995. Nonetheless, we  continue to anticipate that the tightness of  the labor market--and some pickup in  consumer price inflation--will be reflected in greater compensation increases in  the quarters 4 ahead. Indeed, with the CPI now  expected to rise a  bit more

rapidly than we had expected in March, we  have edged up our ECI forecast to show compensation growth increasing from 2.8 percent in 1995 to 3.1 percent in 1996 and to 3.5 percent in 1997.

We  have made a  number of changes to the price forecast. First, we  have raised the projection of energy prices in 1996. Whereas the last Greenbook showed retail energy prices increasing about 12 percent (annual rate) in  the current quarter and holding steady thereafter, they now  appear to be rising at a  rate of  more than 20 percent this quarter and are expected to drop only a  bit over the second half. We continue to expect a  slight rise in retail energy prices in 1997.

In  the food sector, increases in  retail prices have been relatively moderate, on  balance, so far this year. However, with recent developments in grain markets pointing to a  greater risk of higher food prices down the road, we  have raised the food price forecast substantially; it  now shows increases of  more than 4-1/2 percent at an  annual rate in  the second half of 1996, with the rate of rise tapering off gradually over the course of 1997.

Moreover, even this forecast could turn out to be  too optimistic if additional crop problems develop over the course of the summer. Damage to  the winter wheat crop has been extensive, but we still are counting on  normal yields for the crops that currently are being planted. Commodity traders seem to be  anticipating this outcome as well, but the market view--and ours--could change significantly if the weather takes another bad turn in  coming weeks. Another uncertainty in the process is the speed of pass-through of grain price increases to the retail level. Although we've not been able to discover any way to pinpoint the timing of  this passthrough, we're assuming that sizable increases for some products-such as cereals, poultry, and pork--will be showing up in  the second half of  this year. The bulk of the anticipated rise in  beef prices does not come until 1997.

(Footnote continued from previous page)

insurance premiums, and the required parity for mental health benefits in the Senate bill has stirred particular controversy. According to a  CBO analysis, requiring mental health parity would impose direct costs on  the private sector equal to 4  percent of total private health insurance premiums. However, CBO expects that employers would offset much of the increase by trimming other health benefits and that any remaining increases in premiums would be passed on  to workers in the form of lower wages or reductions in other fringe benefits.

Finally, we  have edged up the forecast for the core CPI to reflect the higher labor costs now projected; it is expected to increase 2.9 percent in  1996 and 3.2 percent in 1997. The upward revision would have been greater had we  not made a  downward adjustment to account for the technical changes BLS will introduce within the next few  months to deal with the so-called formula bias that arises from the  way items are phased in and out of  the CPI sample; when fully implemented, these changes are expected to reduce CPI inflation 0.1 percentage point per year.

Money and Credit Flows. With the earlier decline in  the opportunity cost of  retail deposits no longer boosting M2 and with the yield curve having steepened, growth of this aggregate is expected to remain below its strong first-quarter pace over the projection period. On  balance, M2 is projected to rise about 5  percent this year and next, about the same as  nominal GDP: this would match the upper end of the 1996 target range. M3 likely will slow a  bit, with moderate growth in  bank credit, and move into a more traditional relationship with M2 (M3  velocity tending to fall relative to M2 velocity). M3 growth is projected at 5-1/2 percent in 1996 and 1997, just below the upper bound of its current target range. M1 may continue to post declines driven by sweep activity.

The debt of  domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand 4-3/4 percent this year and next, roughly the same as nominal GDP. This projection anticipates some slowing in  household and business borrowing, with federal sector debt rising only slightly faster than the subdued 1995 pace; state and local debt is expected to continue to run off, on  net, as earlier advance refundings are completed.

Nonfinancial businesses in the aggregate are expected to  borrow somewhat less this year but to gradually increase their borrowing next year, as growth in corporate cash flow  begins to  fall short of the rise in  capital outlays. The volume of  merger activity involving debt financing is expected to stay below the brisk firstquarter pace. To  date, there have been no signs to suggest that credit availability is constraining business activity, nor is it expected to be  a  factor in  the outlook. Bank profits and capital positions are strong, and, although banks are no longer easing standards, reports and surveys suggest that they continue to  compete aggressively for business customers. The higher level of  bond rates

in  the projection may encourage some short-term borrowing, but the bond market is expected to remain an important source of funds.

Net borrowing by  households is projected to trend down gradually through 1997. Consumer credit growth is expected to slow, with tightening loan policies only a  minor factor. The strong borrowing in recent years has left a  legacy of rising repayments; and growth in nominal durable expenditures, which are often financed by  credit, is expected to  be  moderate. Home mortgage debt growth is expected to edge down from its pace of  recent years, restrained by the effects of  higher interest rates and the associated falloff in home sales.

The Minimum Wage

Although we  have not incorporated a  hike in the minimum wage in the current projection, we  have examined the effects of  a  90 cent per hour increase from $4.25 per hour to $5.15 per hour, with half coming in  July 1996 and the remainder in  July 1997. Using both macroeconometric models and detailed data on the distribution of wages, we  estimate that such a  hike would have a  direct effect on the level of  hourly compensation of about 0.4 percent. 5

The pass-through to prices, of course, would depend on  the conduct of  monetary policy. If the federal funds rate were held at its current level, the higher minimum wage would probably be  passed gradually into prices and tend to  get built into expectations; under this assumption, we estimate. CPI inflation would be  higher by  about 0.3 percentage point in 1997 and a  bit more than that in 1998. Simulations of the staff's quarterly econometric model suggest that the federal funds rate would have to  be raised roughly 3/4 percentage point immediately and held at the higher level through 1997 to offset the potential effect on  inflation of  the higher minimum wage.

Alternative Simulations

Setting aside the minimum wage question, we  have run two model simulations in which the funds rate is symmetrically raised or lowered relative to the assumption in the Greenbook. Deviations

from baseline start at 10 basis points in  the current quarter and increase to 50 basis points in  the third quarter and to 100 basis points in  the fourth quarter and beyond. In the lower-rate scenario, real GDP growth is little different this year and 0.6 percentage point higher in 1997. The unemployment rate is reduced 0.2 percentage point by  the end of 1997, and core CPI inflation is 0.2 percentage point higher than in the baseline forecast. The effects of the tighter policy scenario are symmetric.

<!-- missing-text -->

Strictly Confidential &lt;FR&gt; Class II FOMC

STAFF PROJECTIONS OF  CHANGES IN  GDP, PRICES, AND (Percent, annual rate) UNEMPLOYMENT

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. For all rban u consumers.
- 2. Level, except as noted.
- 3. Percent change from  two  quarters earlier; for unemployment rate, change in  percentage points.
- 4. Percent change from  four quarters earlier; for unemployment rate, change in  percentage points.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Changes are from  fourth quarter to fourth quarter.
- 2. Private-industry workers.

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Strictly Confidential &lt;FR&gt; Class II  FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

Components may not sum to total  ue to rounding. d

Strictly Class II FOMC

Confidential (FR)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. OMB's March  1996  baseline  eficit timates assuming  the  enactment  of the  President's  oposals) re  $146  billion d es ( pr a FY97. CBO's April 1996 baseline deficit estimates are  $144 billion in FY96 and $171 billion in FY97. Budget receipts, include corresponding Social Security (OASDI) categories. The  OASDI surplus is excluded from the on-budget deficit and classified under current law. The Postal Service deficit is included  in  off-budget utlays eginning  in  FY90. o b in  FY96 and  $140 billion in outlays, and surplus/deficit shown separately as  off-budget, as
- 2. OMB's March 1996 baseline deficit estimates (assuming the  enactment of the President's  oposals), xcluding  deposit nsurance pending,  are pr e i s $159  billion    FY96  and $144  billion    FY97. in in CBO's  April  1996  baseline eficit timates,  xcluding eposit nsurance pending,  are $154  billion d es e d i s in FY96 and $176 billion in  FY97.
- 3.  Other  means  of financing  re  checks issued ess hecks paid,  accrued  items,  and changes  in  other  financial  ssets  nd liabilities. a l c a a
- 4.  HEB is the  NIPA current and  capital account surplus in  current dollars, with cyclically sensitive receipts and  outlays adjusted to the level of potential output generated by 1.8 percent real growth and  an  associated unemployment rate of 6 percent. Quarterly figures for  change in HEB  and FI are not at annual rates. Change in  HEB, as a percent of nominal potential GDP, is reversed in  sign. FI is the weighted difference of discretionary changes in federal spending and taxes (in  chained (1992) dollars), scaled by  real federal consumption plus investment. For change in HEB and FI, negative values indicate restraint.
- 5.  Historical fiscal year data for the unified budget come from  OMB, quarterly data come from the  Monthly Treasury Statement and  may not sum to fiscal year totals.

CHANGE IN DEBT OF THE  DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL SECTORS' (Percent)

<!-- missing-text -->

Confidential  R Class  II F May  16,  1996

1

<!-- missing-text -->

FLOW OF  FUNDS PROJECTIONS: HIGHLIGHTS (Billions  f ollars) o d

- 1.  Data fter 95:Q4  are taff  ojections. a 19 s pr
- 2.  For orporations:  ess f  apital  penditures  er  U.S. nternal ds. c Exc o c ex ov i fun
- 3.  Average ebt  evels  n he eriod  computed s he verage  f eriod-end  bt ositions) ided   nominal DP. d l i t p ( a t a o p de p div by G

Recent Developments

The weighted-average foreign exchange value of the  dollar in terms of the other G-10  currencies has  appreciated 2 percent  on balance  since the March FOMC meeting. The dollar has risen 4 percent in terms  of the mark but  only slightly in terms  of the yen. The dollar has declined  1-1/2 percent in terms of the Mexican peso over the intermeeting period.

The dollar strengthened  as economic indicators  suggested more robust economic activity in the United States,  shifting market expectations  of U.S. monetary policy toward tightening. At the same time,  data from Germany indicated continued weakness in  the pace of economic activity and increased expectations of additional monetary easing by the Bundesbank. In contrast to  developments in continental Europe, indicators of economic activity in Japan suggested further expansion and  fueled beliefs that monetary conditions there might soon be tightened. Late in the period, statements by Japanese officials countered the perception that tightening is imminent.

Short-term market interest  rates declined on balance  over the intermeeting period  in most of the major foreign industrial countries. The  principal  exception was in Japan, where rates were about unchanged. Lower  official lending  rates in  Canada, France, the Netherlands,  and  Sweden were accompanied by declines in market rates. On  average, long-term interest rates abroad  fell  slightly over  the period. Long-term rates  rose  about  20 basis  points in Canada,  where economic activity is  firming, but moved up  slightly in Japan and were about unchanged in  Germany.  Rates  fell about  100 basis points in  Italy, as  market participants  responded  positively to  the outcome of the April  21  election.

.The

Desk did not intervene.

The outcome for  real  economic activity has varied across the major foreign industrial countries  so far in  1996. In  Japan, recovery appears to be continuing. Industrial  production, machinery orders,  and  housing starts expanded  further, on balance, during the first quarter. The unemployment  rate improved  in February and March

after having reached a  postwar high of  3.4 percent in  January. In contrast, economic indicators suggest that activity contracted during the first quarter in Germany, as unusually severe weather depressed construction. The  unemployment rate moved up  to 10.4 percent in  March and improved only marginally in  April. Despite an increase in  March, manufacturing orders declined on average in  the first quarter. Economic activity is expected to recover somewhat in the current quarter, however, as construction rebounds. In  France, real output growth in  the first quarter was positive, but much of the increase represented a  rebound from the strikes in  the fourth quarter of last year. In the  United Kingdom and Canada, preliminary data show further moderate expansion of  economic activity in  the first quarter.

Inflation abroad on  average remains low. The latest measures of consumer and  wholesale prices moved up in  Japan from their levels twelve months earlier in response to  the impact of  past yen depreciation on import prices. In  April, German consumer prices were only 1.3 percent above their level one year earlier. Inflation remains higher in Italy than in  the other foreign G-7 countries, but in the  twelve months through April moved down to 4.5 percent.

The  nominal U.S. trade deficit on  goods and services widened sharply in  January and February. On average in  those two months, exports were about unchanged from  their fourth-quarter level, while imports grew  by  more than 2  percent. Imports of  automotive products and consumer goods recorded large increases from their depressed levels during the second half of last year. The quantity of  oil imported during January/February continued at about its fourthquarter rate. (A  larger-than-normal seasonal inventory drawdown partially offset strong increases in  oil consumption.)

Prices of  merchandise exports increased at an  average annual rate of  0.5 percent in  the first quarter after having remained flat in  the fourth quarter of last year. Prices of  nonagricultural exports continued to  fall moderately, but agricultural export prices, primarily grain prices, rose sharply again. Prices of  nonoil merchandise imports decreased at an  annual rate of  1  percent on average in  the first quarter, about the same decline as in  the fourth quarter.

The price of  imported oil increased substantially in the first quarter owing to a  sharp rise in  March. Spot WTI prices rose more than $2  per barrel in  April, averaging $23.57 per barrel. Spot prices have  moved back down to date in  May and are currently around $21 per barrel. Unusually cold weather in  North America and Japan and  weather-related production disruptions in  the North Sea and Australia have kept prices firm. Prices have also been  more volatile because inventories are reported to  be  at very low levels. Refiners are reluctant to  build inventories because of  the possibility of  a  sharp price decline if  negotiations between Iraq and the United Nations for a  limited oil sale result in  an additional 700,000 barrels per day of  oil on  world markets. Outlook

Total foreign real GDP growth (weighted by  U.S. bilateral export shares) is projected to strengthen from its 3-1/4 percent, annual rate, pace during the first half of  1996 to average about 3-3/4 percent, annual rate, over the remainder of  the forecast period. U.S. real GDP is projected to expand more slowly than foreign real GDP, but its growth has been revised up for the first half of  this year from the March Greenbook outlook. The dollar is projected to remain near recent levels through the end of 1997, a path that is about 2 percent higher than in  the March Greenbook. As a  consequence, real imports now  are projected to grow significantly more rapidly during the first half of  this year than was projected in the  March Greenbook. Real import growth slows somewhat next year. Real net exports are projected to  make a  negative contribution to GDP growth of 0.5 percent in 1996 and to  be  about neutral in 1997.

The Dollar. We  project that the foreign exchange value of  the dollar in  terms of  the other G-10 currencies will remain little changed from its recent higher levels throughout the forecast period, in  line with the stronger outlook for U.S. GDP and interest rates. We  expect that the CPI-adjusted value of  the dollar in  terms of  the currencies of  key developing countries will depreciate at a moderate rate both this year and next. In  particular, from current levels the peso is expected to  appreciate in real terms over the forecast period, as  its nominal exchange rate against the dollar

depreciates at a  slower pace than the extent to  which Mexican inflation exceeds .S. U inflation.

Foreign G-7 countries. The staff projects that real GDP growth in  the foreign G-7 countries (weighted by U.S. bilateral export shares) will average about 2-1/2 percent this year and next, about the same outlook as in  the March Greenbook.

In Japan, projected real output growth for this year has been revised up, to  3  percent, in line with strong production and orders data. Next year, growth is expected to slow to about 2-1/2 percent as fiscal policy shifts toward being contractionary.

In Germany, real growth is projected to rebound this quarter as construction spending is expected to recover. For the remainder of  the forecast period, real GDP is expected to  expand at an annual rate of about 2-1/4 percent, supported by  past monetary ease and the lagged effects of  the depreciation of the mark during the second half of 1995 and early 1996. In addition, recent gains in  real disposable incomes should boost consumption spending.

In  the United Kingdom, real output growth is expected to strengthen a  bit from its first-quarter pace, to  average 2 percent this year and then to  move up  to 2-1/2 percent in 1997. Real growth should improve as inventory investment stops declining and consumption expands.

In Canada, real GDP growth is projected to  strengthen somewhat during the current quarter in  line with the robust expansion observed in employment and the improved economic performance in the United States. Growth is expected to average 2-1/2 percent this year and 2-3/4 percent next year in response to  past reductions in interest rates and improvement in  consumer confidence.

The  outlook for inflation in  the foreign G-7 countries remains low. On  average, consumer price inflation in  these countries (weighted by U.S. bilateral import shares) is  projected to rise from 1-1/4 percent this year to 1-1/2 percent next year. After remaining about flat this year, consumer prices in Japan should rise 1 percent next year (Q4/Q4), the result of  an increase in  the consumption tax in  the second quarter of  1997.

Our outlook for the foreign G-7 countries incorporates the assumption that short-term market interest rates on average are about at  their trough and will rise about 50 basis points over the

forecast period. Rates are assumed to  move down slightly further in Germany and in some other continental European countries through the end of this year before rising moderately next year. In  Japan, short-term market rates are assumed to increase late this year as the Bank of  Japan tightens and to change little in 1997. Long-term rates abroad are expected to rise only slightly over the forecast period.

Other countries. The real GDP of  major developing country trading partners of  the United States (weighted by  U.S. export shares) is  projected to increase 5 percent to 6 percent per year during 1996-97, compared with 3-1/4 percent growth during 1995 (Q4/Q4). The pickup in  growth in  1996-97 largely reflects the recovery in  Mexico.

We continue to project that real GDP in  Mexico will grow at an average rate of about 5  percent per  year in 1996-97, as risks and uncertainties about the  macroeconomy and policy continue to  be reduced. We  now  project that real GDP in  Venezuela will fall around 3 percent in 1996, a  substantial downward revision from the  March Greenbook. The stabilization plan announced in  mid-April is expected to  have a  significantly contractionary effect on  output this year, as the positive effect of  a  depreciation of  the bolivar on  net exports is more than offset by  fiscal contraction and a tightening of  credit conditions. Some recovery is likely in 1997. Real output in  Brazil is now  projected to expand only 2  percent in 1996, reflecting indications of slower-than-expected growth during the first quarter and continued high real interest rates, but it should accelerate to  more than 3  percent growth during 1997.

Our  major trading partners in  Asia are expected to experience strong growth in 1996-97, although growth is projected to  decline from an  average rate of  around 7-1/2 percent in  1995 to 7 percent in 1996-97. The yen's depreciation during the second half of  last year will lead to a  considerable deceleration in  the exports of  these countries.

U.S. real exports and imports of goods and services. Real exports of  goods and services are projected to  increase this year at about their 1995 pace and somewhat faster next year. Exports of computers are expected to  have grown very rapidly in real terms during the first quarter, near the extremely high pace seen during

the second half  of last year, and are projected to expand at a slower but still substantial pace over the remainder of  the forecast period. Real semiconductor exports are projected to rebound from a decline during the first quarter. The quantities of  other goods exports (excluding agricultural products) are projected to bounce back in  the current quarter from their decline in the  first quarter, in  part a  make-up of  automobile shipments following the resolution of  the GM strike, and to average about 3 percent annual growth this year and next. The  projected recovery in  economic activity abroad underlies the sustained growth in these exports.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: NIPAbasis, chained (1992) dollars.

- 2. Merchandise imports excluding oil, computers, and  semiconductors.

Real imports of  goods and services are projected to  have bounced back sharply in  the  first quarter from their weakness during the second half of  last year. Real import growth is expected to slow a  bit from the first-quarter pace but to remain moderately strong during the second half of  this year and 1997. Imported computers are projected to  grow rapidly over the forecast period in real terms, as are imported semiconductors. Imports of  other nonoil goods are projected to  decelerate from their double-digit growth in  the first-quarter and to expand in line with U.S. real GDP over

the remainder of  the forecast period. These imports are boosted a bit late this year and in 1997 by  the lagged effects of  the stronger dollar. We expect the quantity of oil imports to rise sharply this quarter, after several quarters of  no  net growth, and then to expand over the remainder of the forecast period, as consumption increases, inventories are rebuilt, and U.S. production declines.

Oil prices. Although spot oil prices have partially retraced their recent spike, the  projected prices of  imported oil have been revised up $2.49 per barrel for the second quarter (to  $19.82/b) and $1.63 per barrel for the third quarter (to $17.83/b). Our long-run projections for WTI and the oil import unit value are $19.50/b and $17.00/b, respectively. This long-run outlook incorporates the assumption that in 1997 Iraqi sales of oil will take place under UN direction.

Prices of  non-oil imports and exports. Prices of  non-oil imports are projected to  increase only slightly during 1996-1997 as foreign inflation remains low. Prices of  nonagricultural exports (including computers and semiconductors) are projected to change little on  balance this year and then to rise somewhat next year.

<!-- missing-text -->

Nominal trade and current account balances. The  nominal trade balance on  goods and services is  expected to  widen somewhat over the forecast period, from its first-quarter rate of  about $105 billion to  $120 billion in  the fourth quarter of  1997. While net earnings from direct investment are projected to continue to expand, that gain will be  more than offset by  an  increasing deficit on portfolio income. Accordingly, the current account balance is projected to deteriorate over 1996-97, reaching about $175 billion in 1997, 2-1/4 percent of  GDP.

REAL GDP  AND  CONSUMER PRICES, SELECTED COUNTRIES, 1994-97 (Percent; quarterly change at an  annual rate except as  noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Annual values are  measured from Q4 to  Q4.

- 2.  CPI excluding mortgage interest payments, which is including mortgage interest payments was shown. the targeted inflation rate. Previously the CPI

Strictly Confidential (FR)  Class II-FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

Strictly Confidential (FR)  Class II-FOMC

OUTLOOK FOR  U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS IN  GOODS, SERVICES, AND  THE  CURRENT ACCOUNT (Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates)

<!-- missing-text -->

i/

Percent change

(AR)  from previous

period;

percent changes

for annual

data are

calculated

Q4/Q4.