Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Confidential  FR)  Class ( II FOMC

Part 2

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Recent  Developments

January 26, 1996

Confidential  FR) Class ( III FOMC

January 26,  1996

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

As 1996 began, the economy appeared to  be  expanding, but only slowly. Data are lagging because of  the December and January government shutdowns, but the available information indicates fairly clearly that manufacturing activity has been on  the soft side recently--owing in  part, we  suspect, to efforts by businesses in a number of  sectors to curb inventory accumulation. Even so, the labor market remained fairly taut, at least through December, with growth in  jobs continuing at a  moderate clip; hourly earnings figures last year hinted at some firming in  wages. Because of  the delays in  the PPI and CPI releases, we have no  timely statistical information on  broad price movements; apart from pressures in agricultural and energy markets, however, the price inflation picture still appears fairly calm.

Labor Market Developments

Labor market conditions were little changed in December and remained in line with those generally prevailing over the second half of 1995. Nonfarm payroll employment expanded 150,000, and the unemployment rate stayed at 5.6 percent. Although aggregate hours of private production or  nonsupervisory employees fell 0.2 percent last month, the increase in  the quarterly average of  this measure of labor input, 2.1 percent, was about the same as  that in  the third quarter.

Several statistical problems raise some uncertainty about the reliability of the estimated changes in  payrolls for recent months. Because of the federal government shutdown, the BLS was unable to incorporate the additional responses to the  November payroll survey into revised levels of employment, hours, and earnings for  November. However, in  estimating the change in  employment from November to December, the BLS was able to  match the expanded set of  responses

<!-- missing-text -->

1.  Average change from final month of  preceding period to  final month of period indicated.

- 2. Survey of establishments.

SELECTED UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION RATES (Percent; based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

for November with a  relatively good initial set of December reports that the states had taken more time to collect and verify during the delay. Thus, the reported estimates of  November-to-December changes in  the payroll series may  be  more reliable than the levels reported for either month. Nonetheless, because the BLS had to deviate from its normal procedures in  processing the data, we suggest interpreting all the recent payroll series with some caution, although we  have no  basis for thinking the alternative approach has biased the estimates either up or  down.

On  a  different statistical issue, the BLS suggested that some seasonal hiring that would normally have been captured in  December may have been picked up  by  the relatively late November survey, tending to  inflate the October-to-November change in  employment and to  understate the November-to-December change. Although this effect is modest overall--perhaps 25,000--it is most significant for several series that are particularly sensitive to seasonal hiring, such as retail trade and amusement services; for these, the net change from October to December should provide a  more reliable estimate of recent trends.

Although job growth in  the private sector from November to December may have been understated, because of  the timing of  the November survey, it  was also boosted by  the return of  40,000 striking workers to  Boeing and Caterpillar payrolls. 1 On  net, private employment expanded in December roughly in  line with the average monthly gain during the second half of 1995 of  around 120,000. Factory employment edged up 11,000 (strike-adjusted) after having declined almost 30,000 per month (strike-adjusted) over the

Unemployment Insurance

(Weekly  data;  seasonally adjusted; BLS basis)

Initial Claims

<!-- missing-text -->

Insured Unemployment

Millions

Jan. 13

M

1995

All  regular  programs

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

Incl.

EUC

adjustment"

1993

1994

2.89

1996

- Note. Only  the  state rogram components p of these series  re  seasonally djusted. a a
- SBeginning  July  18,  1992, Includes Initial aims cl filed under the  emergency unemployment benefits program by indviduals also eligible
- to ile under regular  programs. The  EUC program ended on April  30, 1994.
- "Includes  staff  stimates  of  emergency  benefits  ecipients o  are  also ligible e r wh e to file under  regular rograms. p

i

3.8

3.4

2.6

22

1.8

previous eight months. All of  the gains occurred in  durable goods industries, such as lumber, furniture, motor vehicles, fabricated metals, and electrical equipment; jobs in  nondurables, such as apparel textiles, and chemicals, continued to contract. Elsewhere in the goods-producing sector employment in contract construction rose 14,000, despite reports of  unfavorable weather, owing to gains in "indoor" special trades.

Employment in  the services industry rose at  a  relatively moderate pace; excluding the seasonally sensitive amusement industry, which lost 44,000 jobs between October and December, employment in services rose about 100,000 per month in each of  the past two months. Growth remained solid in  health, engineering and management, and computer services, but employment in  help supply services, which had expanded sharply in  both 1993 and 1994, was little changed in December and posted a  net gain of  only 39,000 for all of 1995. Elsewhere, employment at retailers was up 34,000, on net, between October and December, although major job losses occurred at department stores (-55,000) and apparel and accessory outlets (-22,000)

In  December, average weekly hours dropped to 34.4 hours, the low end of  the range within which this measure has fluctuated since July 1995 The fall in hours was widespread. Both average weekly hours and average weekly overtime hours in manufacturing fell 0.1 hour in  December, to 41.4 and 4.3 hours respectively. Over the year, the factory workweek dropped 0.8 hour from its exceptionally high level at the end of 1994.

The  household survey showed the aggregate unemployment rate holding steady, with employment and unemployment falling 106,000 and 32,000 respectively, Because of  the government shutdown, the nonresponse rate in December's Current Population Survey was

data)

<!-- missing-text -->

1.  Annual and  quarterly changes are  measured from the  final month of the  preceding period to  the final month of  the period indicated.

Earnings f o Production  and Nonsupervisory  Workers

(Twelve-month change)

<!-- missing-text -->

somewhat above average--9.2 percent versus a  norm of 6.2 percent to 7  2 percent Although the estimates have greater sampling error than usual, BLS uncovered no signs that the quality of  the data was significantly compromised. Unemployment rates for major demographic groups were little changed at 4.9 percent for adult men, 4.6 percent for adult women, and 18.3 percent for teenagers. The labor force participation rate edged down another 0.1 percentage point, to 66.3 percent, the lowest reading in 1995

Recent data on unemployment insurance claims suggest little change in  labor market conditions between mid-December and  midJanuary. The four-week moving average of  state initial claims has fluctuated narrowly since the week ending December 9 between 362,750 and 378,500, and stood at 374,000 for the week ending January 20. Delayed filings in  areas affected by  the East Coast storm likely caused the wide fluctuations in  initial claims during the latest two weeks The number of  beneficiaries reported as insured under state programs was less affected by  the weather and, at 2  77 million for the week ending January 13, was up about 150,000 from its midDecember level

Average hourly earnings increased 0.4 percent in  December after having been unchanged in  November On  a  year-over-year basis, this wage measure was up 3.2 percent in  December compared with its 1994 rise of  2.8 percent. During the second half of  1995, the trend in average hourly earnings accelerated to  a  rate somewhat above the trend in  the ECI for wages of  nonproduction workers. (The ECI for December 1995, which was originally scheduled to  be released on January 30, is now  scheduled for release on February 13.)

GROWTH IN SELECTED COMPONENTS OF  INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION (Percent change from preceding comparable period)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Industrial Production

Industrial production is estimated to  have edged up just 0.1 percent in December The end of  the strike at Boeing at  midmonth and an  increase in  motor vehicle assemblies propped up the December index a  bit Excluding these factors, factory output was lackluster, on  balance, at year-end. Production of  nondurable consumer goods and industrial equipment declined last month, and the expansion of output of information-related products, mainly semiconductors, slowed.

The factory operating rate dropped to 81.8 percent in December, about 1/2 percentage point above its long-term average. Since the beginning of 1995, utilization rates for  most major manufacturing industries have eased, the exception being the industrial machinery and computer equipment industry. However, utilization in  primary processing industries remained at a  relatively high 86.1 percent rate in  the fourth quarter, with operating rates above 1988-89 highs for primary metals and petroleum products.

After increasing for a  second consecutive month in December to 11.9 million units (annual rate) motor vehicle assemblies appear to have dropped back sharply in  January. Weekly production data through January 26 suggest that assemblies are running at a 10.9 million unit rate, well below plans that stood at 11 7  million units earlier this month. While a  small part of  the downshift in output, about 200,000 units (annual rate) occurred during the blizzard, the bulk of  the change in  assemblies was the result of plant shutdowns later in the month to  control inventories, which 2 were uncomfortably high at the end of 1995. Our contacts in

Manufacturing  Activity

Manufacturing  Industrial oduction Pr excluding  Motor Vehicles, ircraft A and Parts

®

Quarterly  average

_

1993

120

116

112

108

1995

Motor Vehicle  Production FRB  Seasonals

<!-- missing-text -->

Ratio  scale,  1987=100

the motor vehicle industry indicate that scheduled production of 11.9 million units (annual rate) in February and March is  being revised. At  this point, we  have only been able to confirm that Chrysler will shave 170,000 units (annual rate) from its February plan; Ford and GM  have not yet provided official figures.

<!-- missing-text -->

Anecdotal reports and available statistical indicators suggest that industrial activity outside the  motor vehicle sector remained sluggish in January. The forward-looking orders components of  the national and regional purchasing managers indexes released early in the month pointed to a  further slowing of  the manufacturing sector early this year With four weeks of  estimates available for January, our  weekly index of  indicators of non-auto physical product, which covers about a  sixth of  the IP index, is likely to edge down; declines in electricity generation, coal paper, lumber, and appliances appear to  be offsetting increases in steel and petroleum products. Nevertheless, IP  in  January will be  boosted

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Data  on  sales of  trucks and  imported autos for  the  most recent month are  preliminary and  subject to  revision.

- 1.  Components may  not add  to  totals because of  rounding.
- 2.  Excludes some vehicles produced in  Canada that are  classified as  imports by  the industry.

<!-- missing-text -->

about 1/4 percentage point by  the return to full production at Boeing.

At  this point, we  do not believe that the blizzard that struck the East Coast at  mid-month will seriously depress industrial production for January: Most businesses contacted by  staff of  the Board and the five Reserve Banks on the East Coast indicated that much of  any  weather-related downtime likely would be  made up later in  the month. Important exceptions were motor vehicle producers, as noted above, and makers of  home appliances, televisions, and lighting and wiring products who do  not intend to  make up storminduced output losses. In addition, and unrelated to the storm, industry contacts noted the persistence of outsized inventories for aluminum mill products and coated paper and softer demand for basic capital goods.

Motor Vehicles

Sales of light vehicles reportedly surged in  December to  a 15.9 million unit annual rate, from the 14.8 million unit rate registered in  November The reported increase in total light vehicle sales last month was overstated by  roughly 1/2 million units because major firms (except Ford) extended their December reporting periods by  one or two days into January; reported January sales will be  held down as a  result. Even after adjustment of  December sales for variations in  reporting periods, the estimated pace of sales last month--closer to 15-1/4 million units--was relatively robust. Consumer incentives helped push up automobile and truck sales of General Motors, Chrysler, and Japanese models. Sales at Ford, whose incentives were less generous, fell a bit. Confidential data from automakers suggest that Ford relied on fleet sales last month to keep total sales from falling further, while GM  experienced gains in

Personal  Consumption Expenditures

Total  Real

PCE

<!-- missing-text -->

Real

PCE

for urable Goods

D

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

both retail and fleet sales. Sales of  light vehicles totaled 14.8 million units for all of 1995, compared with 15.0 million units in 1994.

Producers indicate that underlying demand weakened in  January, mainly for autos rather than light trucks. Many firms are reluctant to abandon generous incentive packages. Ford has recently joined the others by  offering a  package of  incentives on  about 60 percent of  its volume, including the 1996 Taurus; Chrysler is  poised to sweeten its incentive package on autos to  match Ford. The preliminary report from the January Michigan Survey bear out the producers' sense that demand has softened. Households' appraisals of  buying conditions for cars plunged after having held in  a reasonably favorable range throughout most of 1995. The survey's respondents cited less-favorable economic conditions among reasons for their sour views on  car buying. In  the December Conference Board Survey, the percentage of respondents planning to  buy a  new car remained unchanged.

Personal Income and Consumption

One notable casualty of  the government shutdown is the availability of  timely data on non-auto consumer spending. Real personal consumption expenditures increased 0.9 percent in  November after a  0.6 percent decline in  October, and estimates of  total PCE growth in  August and September were revised downward. The level of total real PCE in  November was about 1/2 percent above the thirdquarter average. After two  months of  decline, spending on  durable goods jumped sharply in  November owing to large increases in spending on  both motor vehicles and other durable goods. Real spending on nondurables, although up  in  November, was only fractionally above its third-quarter level However, spending on services moved noticeably above the recent trend because of  the

of  dollars)

<!-- missing-text -->

REAL PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES (Percent change from  the preceding period)

<!-- missing-text -->

effect of somewhat colder than average temperatures on  outlays for electricity and natural gas.

Anecdotal reports and statistical indicators from private sources available for December indicate that the strength of  holiday spending varied appreciably among types of goods, with electronic goods moving well but purchases of  apparel sluggish. Reports of same-store sales at the  major retail chains generally pointed to weak holiday sales, but estimates of  total chain store sales suggested reasonably healthy spending. However, no measure of  chain store sales has proved a  very reliable indicator of  the official census estimates of  retail sales in  the past. These indexes are plagued by  a  variety of problems, including data collection errors, inconsistencies in definitions, and seasonal adjustment difficulties. In addition, many tend to  focus on only certain types of stores or certain categories of  merchandise.

Wages and salaries fell 0.1 percent in  November, retracing only a  small part of  their enormous October gain and leaving the November level of real disposable income well above its third-quarter average. Among sources of  nonlabor income, rental income rose appreciably in  October and November after having declined in  the third quarter Most other categories of  personal income posted small to  moderate gains in  October and November Nominal personal income likely continued to trend upward in  December, with the most recent employment report indicating further gains in  average hourly earnings that more than offset the decline in aggregate hours, Altogether, the available evidence on  income and spending suggests that the fourth-quarter saving rate was considerably above its 4.1 percent third-quarter average.

Consumer Surveys

Consumer Sentiment

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

The most recent data on consumer sentiment suggest mixed prospects for spending. According to the preliminary, partial sample report, the Michigan SRC index of  consumer sentiment declined 1  1  points in  early January, with less optimistic appraisals of future business conditions offsetting more favorable assessments of current and future personal financial situations and current appliance-buying conditions. Although the overall Michigan index is now  a  few  points below its strong readings of  the past summer, it remains in  a  range that has historically been accompanied by  solid gains in  consumer spending. However, results not included in the overall index pointed to somewhat greater pessimism in early January, with unemployment expectations jumping sharply and consumers expressing substantially less willingness to use credit The SRC identified the  winter storms as a  possible contributor to the  concerns about joblessness--and the recent news of  major corporate restructurings, especially at  AT&amp;T may have affected public perceptions. The shift in attitudes toward use of credit could indicate that increased debt burdens--and perhaps the publicity given them--may have made respondents more sensitive about credit use; but this series is  particularly erratic and several times in the past few  years has registered dramatic declines followed by  sharp recoveries.

The  most recent Conference Board data point to a  small deterioration in  confidence in  December Nonetheless, the level of the Conference Board index remained in  the narrow, generally optimistic range that has prevailed over the past year. Likewise, an  index based on  the separate questions about employment expectations held at a  fairly positive level last month.

Private  ousing Activity H (Millions  f nits; asonally  djusted  nnual ate) o u se a a r n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. p Preliminary.  evised. n.a. ot  available. rR N

Private ousing Starts H

(Seasonally  djusted  nnual ate) a a r

<!-- missing-text -->

Housing Markets

Recent data on  housing demand and building activity have been mixed. Total housing starts rebounded in  November to 1.42 million units at an  annual rate, owing to a  rise in  multifamily construction. Single-family housing starts were unchanged in November, but permits, which are measured more reliably than starts, bounced back to their relatively strong September level. Judging from historical relationships, this volume of  permits suggests that the  estimate of single-family starts may  understate the actual trend in construction activity.

On  the other hand, sales of  new and existing homes slipped a bit  at  the end of last year after having surged in  the summer. New home sales fell in  November, and existing home sales fell a noticeable 3  percent in  December. However, because most of the latter transactions are recorded at  closing, they do not really represent a  more current indicator of demand than new  home sales, which are counted primarily at the time the contract is signed.

The basic determinants of  housing demand appear to favor continued strength in  home construction. Rates on  fixed-rate mortgages in the first three weeks of  January averaged more than 200 basis points lower than in  the same period a  year earlier, and our estimate of  the debt-service burden of home ownership in  the current quarter is  just above the 1993 low. Moreover, the most recent indicators suggest that, on  balance, demand for single-family homes may  have strengthened a  bit again in  the past two months. In particular, builders' ratings of  new  home sales turned more positive in  December and January, and applications for home purchase financing have been on  the rise (apart from storm effects). The

Indicators of  Housing  Demand

(Seasonally adjusted; FRB  seasonals except sales)

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer

Homebuying

<!-- missing-text -->

Attitudes

<!-- missing-text -->

Cash-Flow  Burden of  Homeownership Fixed  Rate Mortgages

<!-- missing-text -->

Multifamily  Rental Vacancy Rate

(Seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Fundamental Determinants  of  Equipment Spending

<!-- missing-text -->

exception is the decline in  consumer assessments of  homebuying conditions in  January, as measured by  the preliminary Michigan Survey--extending a  downtrend that began in  midsummer; less favorable views of  business conditions have played a  role in  this slippage.

Multifamily housing starts rose sharply in  November However, a  continuation of starts at  the November level seems far from assured. Although the rental vacancy rate has edged down a  bit during the past several years, progress in  working down the excess stock of  apartments has been extremely slow, and real rents for apartments have been stagnant for the past three years.

Business Fixed Investment

As  is the case for other economic indicators, the publication of data relating to  business fixed investment is behind schedule. On  net, both the limited data received since the December Greenbook and anecdotal reports suggest that demand for capital goodsespecially equipment--may have slackened somewhat recently.

In  particular, growth of  business investment in  computers is expected to slow from the very rapid pace earlier in  the expansion, but still to remain at double-digit rates. Our contacts in  the computer industry were generally disappointed by  sales in  November and December, but we  believe that some of  the earnings squeeze they experienced may reflect lower margins rather than reduced output The Semiconductor Industry Association's book-to-bill ratio--which provides some leading information on computer shipments--also dropped sharply in  November and December, but it remains in  a  range that historically has coincided with positive growth in nominal computer shipments. Given the rapid technical change in  this sector--and accompanying steep price declines--modest growth in

BUSINESS CAPITAL SPENDING INDICATORS

(Percent change from  preceding comparable period;

based on  seasonally adjusted data, in  current dollars)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  Based on  1992 chain-weighted data; percent change, annual rate. n.a. Not available.

Orders and Shipments  of  Nondefense  Capital  oods G

Office nd Computing  Equipment a

<!-- missing-text -->

Other Equipment  (Ex. ircraft  nd  Computing Equipment) A a

<!-- missing-text -->

Nonresidential Construction, Permits, and  Contracts

(Six-month moving  average)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note.  The underlying onthly data  were indexed  to  Dec. 1982 m =  100; a  six-month moving average was applied  to  the  indexed  data.

nominal shipments would be consistent with healthy growth in real outlays.

Business purchases of transportation equipment held up  well in the fourth quarter The confidential information on  light-vehicle fleet sales for GM  and Ford showed an  increase of roughly 5 percent. Although new  orders for heavy trucks plunged, sales in  the fourth quarter were about 5  percent above their third-quarter average, as producers continued to work on a  large backlog of orders.

Looking ahead, Boeing's bookings surged dramatically in December, with orders for 52 of  their new 777s and for 21 747s; orders rose further in January. These bookings, which were placed largely by  foreign buyers but include some domestic orders, will begin to affect deliveries in 1997

Data on  contracts received since the December Greenbook suggest that growth in construction expenditures is dropping back a  bit from the rapid pace in  most of 1995. Contracts increased significantly in  November, boosted by  healthy advances in the office and industrial sectors, and this rise roughly offset the October decline.

Business Inventories

The only incoming statistics on  business inventories, outside of those held by  motor vehicle dealers, since the December Greenbook are the book-value figures for wholesale trade inventories in November. They show  that stocks held by  wholesalers were drawn down at an  $11.9 billion annual rate after having risen at a  $24.9 billion rate in  October; stocks expanded at a  $17 billion rate during the third quarter The bulk of  the  November decline was in nondurables, particularly groceries, farm products, and the miscellaneous category. Among durables, distributors of  machinery

<!-- missing-text -->

Inventory-Sales Ratios

Manufacturing

<!-- missing-text -->

Trade Excluding  Autos

<!-- missing-text -->

also reported a  sizable liquidation, but that was more than offset by  a  sizable accumulation of  stocks at distributors of electrical goods, which include household appliances.

Federal Sector

The federal unified budget deficit in  November was $38 billion. 5 This figure brought the total deficit for the first two months of  fiscal year 1996 to $61 billion, a  drop of  about $7  billion from the comparable period in fiscal year 1995. Outlays increased about $2  billion, while receipts grew about $9  billion, or about 5  percent.

Outlays for the fiscal year through November were up only slightly from the comparable period of  fiscal 1995. Outlays for Medicare and health continued to rise at  about their recent trends. However, defense outlays continued to decline, and nondefense outlays other than for  major entitlement programs and net interest fell sharply. These "other" outlays were restrained in  part by  the lack of  appropriations and the stringent funding levels in  the continuing resolutions. In  addition, agricultural spending was  held down by  a  drop in  crop subsidies this year.

BEA  estimates that real federal consumption and investment expenditures (the category that replaces "purchases" in  the NIPAs) declined at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent in  the third quarter of 1995, compared with an increase of about 5  percent for purchases in the advance release. This marked change is largely attributable to data received over the past several months and the switch to the chain-type measures of  price changes; the redefinition of  government accounts appears to have had a  negligible effect. BEA's

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS (Unified basis, billions of  dollars, except where otherwise noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Components may  not sum to  totals because of  rounding.

revision also contained sizable changes to data for other recent quarters; nonetheless, on  balance, they still show a  substantial decline in  real defense spending over the past few years and little net change in other real consumption and investment expenditures.

The two shutdowns of the government and the January blizzard are likely to  have noticeable effects on real government consumption and investment expenditures in the NIPA in  the fourth and first quarters. The effect comes primarily in real compensation, which BEA derives mainly from estimates of  hours worked. For the fourth quarter we  estimate that the mid-November furlough and the first two weeks of  the second furlough lowered the level of real compensation (and thus expenditures) nearly $5-1/2 billion at  an annual rate. For the first quarter the level of real expenditures was lowered about $1  billion during the last week of  the second furlough and about $2  billion because of  the "Blizzard of '96." In contrast, these developments have little effect on  nominal compensation in  the NIPAs: According to BEA's convention, wages are measured on an  accrual basis and the drop in real compensation is offset by  a  corresponding rise in  the government deflator. For the unified budget, which measures wages on a  disbursement basis, the second shutdown shifted some payments from December to  January but is expected to  have little effect on  fiscal year totals.

The  Administration and congressional leaders have acknowledged that prospects for  major deficit reduction are slim, but they are now  considering enactment of  a  package of  reductions on  which they previously agreed and a  modest tax cut. On  January 25, the  House passed a  fourth continuing resolution that would fund federal agencies lacking appropriations through March 15 Detailed cost estimates for the bill are not yet available, but the implied level of outlays appears to  be  broadly similar to that in  the previous

II-34

continuing resolution. The Senate will consider the measure on January 26, and the President is expected to sign it.

State and Local Governments

State and local government employment rose substantially in December, but this followed two months of  essentially no change, and the average monthly increase for the fourth quarter was only about 10,000. Over 1995 as a  whole, employment growth averaged just 14,000 per month, the smallest rise since 1991.

The fiscal position of  most states is quite good, and many would like to cut taxes a bit this year. However, they are being cautious in  light of  the uncertainty about federal welfare and Medicaid reform, the size and structure of  other grants programs, and changes in  federal tax laws. Notably, most states appear to  be basing decisions on  programs that depend heavily on  federal funding (such as  highways, waste treatment, community development, and educational programs) on the lowest likely level of  federal aid.

Moreover, although most states are in  good fiscal shape, some are not. In  a  survey by  the National Conference of  State Legislatures of the fiscal situation as of  mid-fiscal year 1996, ten states reported revenues coming in  below projections, compared with just two states last year. Several states indicated that the weakness was due to lower-than-expected sales and excise taxes, while a  few  blamed smaller personal income tax collections. The states reporting problems are generally less populous: Idaho, Hawaii, Maine, Maryland, Nebraska, New  Mexico, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Vermont, and Wyoming.

Prices

No  data on  consumer or  producer prices have been released since the December Greenbook. Commodity market developments have been mixed and do not indicate that strong inflationary pressures are

present in  the economy. Weather-related tightness in oil and gas markets could lead to some near-term volatility in energy prices, but  the potential increases do not appear significant enough to  push overall inflation in  the next several months to  alarming levels.

Turning to  prices for industrial commodities, the Journal of Commerce commodity price index has edged down since the last Greenbook, owing in  part to a  fall in  the metals component, which is about 2-1/2 percent lower than in  mid-December. The CRB spot index, which gives substantial weight to foodstuffs, dropped somewhat over the same period. Prices for aluminum have fallen 6 percent in  the weeks since the December Greenbook, and copper prices have plunged roughly 15 percent. Large shipments of  copper into London Metal Exchange warehouses appear to  have eased traders' fears of a  shortterm supply squeeze. Prices for lead and tin  have posted modest declines. The one exception to the general weakness in  metals prices is the price of steel scrap, which has risen about 8  percent since mid-December; the price of  steel scrap is slightly above the average that prevailed in 1995.

Energy markets have been dominated by  the below-normal temperatures in recent weeks. Weather-induced price increases for natural gas were magnified by  the relatively low  levels of  working gas storage and by  pipeline constraints; in some parts of the country, spot wellhead prices in  early January were nearly double the levels observed in the fall. Sharp increases in  natural gas prices spilled over to the petroleum market as some utility power plants with dual-fuel capabilities switched to the less expensive residual fuel oil for  boiler fuel, boosting petroleum demand. Prices for home heating oil also rose to new  highs in early January. Stronger-than-expected demand for motor fuels has bolstered gasoline prices as  well.

COMMODITY PRICE INDEXES

----------------

Percent change

1 - - - -

- -

-

- -

-

-

-

-

- -

-

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Not seasonally adjusted. Copyright for Journal of  Commerce data is  held by CIBCR, 1994.

- 1. Change is  measured to  end of  period, from last observation of previous period.
- 2. Week  of  the  December Greenbook.
- 3. Monthly observations. IMF index includes items not shown separately.
- n.a. Not  available.

Index  Weights

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Forest roducts,  ndustrial  tals,  nd  other  ndustrial  terials. p i me a i ma

Commodity  Price  Measures

Journal  of Commerce Index

95

55

<!-- missing-text -->

CRB Spot Industrials

<!-- missing-text -->

CRB Futures

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

1983

Note.  Weekly data. uesdays. Vertical  ines n small  panels  indicate  eek of  last reenbook.  The Journal  of  Commerce T l o w G index  is ased almost b entirely  industrial  mmodities,  with  a  small  weight  given  to nergy  commodities,  and the  CRB on co e spot price  index  consists  ntirely industrial e of commodities,  excluding  energy. The CRB  futures ndex  gives bout a i a 60 percent  weight  to  food  commodities and splits e  remaining  weight  roughly th equally mong  energy  commodities,  industrial mmodities,  and precious etals.  Copyright  for  ournal  of  Commerce a co m J data  is eld h by CIBCR,  1994.

SPOT PRICES OF  SELECTED COMMODITIES

1 - - - - - -

<!-- missing-text -->

- - - - - - - - -

- 3. Changes are in  basis points.

Prices for crude oil continued to move up in  the weeks following the December Greenbook, and the spot price for WTI crude broke the $20 per barrel barrier during the recent snowstorms for the first time since early May. Although the recent oil price increases were largely weather related, several other factorsthe current low  levels of  inventories, the illness of  Saudi King Fahd, and the possibility of a  U.S. sanction against Nigerian oil exports--may have intensified price pressures. In recent weeks, oil prices have dropped somewhat, in  part owing to concern that Iraqi oil might begin flowing into the  market soon. The WTI spot price has retreated to the $18.00 to $19.00 range, a  price we  believe is more in line with market fundamentals.

In agriculture, prices of  wheat have been running at twentyyear highs; corn and soybean prices are at  the highest level in several years. U.S. production of  major agricultural crops--corn, wheat, and soybeans--dropped sharply in  1995; corn production was down about 25 percent, soybean production dropped 15 percent, and wheat production fell about 6  percent But  weak U.S. production is only part of  the story: World production fell last year while world demand rose, bolstered by  rising incomes in the developing world, Prospective stocks-to-use ratios at  the end of the 1995 crop marketing year--about the time of the 1996 harvest--are at twentyyear lows, indicating that supplies going into the 1996 crop marketing year will be tight. The markets are likely to respond fairly strongly to any news about crop output, as they did in  recent weeks when the South American soybean crop seemed to  be  headed for trouble and when the U.S. livestock herd was reported to be  bigger than traders had thought. 7

(Percent

RECENT CHANGES IN  CONSUMER PRICES change; based on  seasonally adjusted data) 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Changes are from final month of  preceding period to  final month of  period indicated.
- 2. Official index for  all  urban consumers.
- 3. Index for  urban wage earners and  clerical workers

RECENT CHANGES IN  PRODUCER PRICES (Percent change; based on  seasonally adjusted data) 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Changes are from  final month of preceding period to  final month of  period indicated.
- 2.  Excludes materials for  food manufacturing and  animal feeds.

Looking forward, futures contracts for corn and soybeans with maturities in  late 1996 have moved up somewhat since the December Greenbook. At the same time, futures contracts for livestock have fallen a  little, with futures prices for hogs down sharply in 1996 relative to 1995. However, this favorable development in near-term prices, if  it  holds up, will likely lead to  higher prices for meats in 1997 because farmers are likely to respond to lower prices by liquidating part of  the breeding herd.

INFLATION RATES EXCLUDING FOOD AND ENERGY (Percentage change from twelve months earlier)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Relative importance weight in  CPI  excluding food and  energy.
- 2.  Private industry workers, periods ended in  September.
- 3. End-of-period value.
- 4.  Latest reported value: December.
- 5. Data after 1993 are  not directly comparable with  earlier values because of  a  redesign of the CPS in  January 1994.
- 6. One-year-ahead expectations.
- 7. Latest reported value: January for  the Michigan Survey; December for  the Conference Board Survey.
- 8.  BLS import price index (not  seasonally adjusted), periods ended in  September.

APPENDIX A

COMPREHENSIVE REVISIONS TO  THE NIPA

Overview

On  January 19, BEA released a  comprehensive revision to the national income and product accounts. The revision, which covers data back to 1959, involved: (1)  the replacement of  constant-dollar figures with chain-type indexes as the featured measures of real GDP and its components; (2)  the separation of  government purchases into consumption expenditures and investment and a  new  definition of government consumption; (3)  improved statistical methods for estimating depreciation, motor vehicle expenditures, and contributions to private pensions; and (4)  the incorporation of  more reliable and comprehensive source data.

The new  source data include items generally incorporated only with comprehensive revisions, most notably the 1987 input-output tables, the 1991 Residential Finance Survey, and the 1992 economic censuses. The data for  more recent years also were affected by items that generally are incorporated in  the NIPA at the time of the regular annual revisions, such as IRS tabulations of  business tax returns for 1992 and 1993. Census annual surveys of  businesses and government for 1992, 1993, and 1994, and BLS tabulations of  wages and salaries for 1994.

Revisions to Real GDP Growth

Over the 1960-94 period, growth of real GDP is  now estimated to have averaged 3.2 percent per year, 0.2 percentage point higher than previously estimated. Revisions to current-dollar GDP had little net effect on  average growth rates (see table). The move from a fixed-weight to a  chain-type formula for real GDP raised average growth 0.2 percentage point over 1960-94; average growth was boosted 0.3 percentage point before 1988 and was lowered 0.2 percentage point during 1988-94. By  sector, the move to the chain index had the largest effects on growth in  business fixed investment, exports, and imports, a  reflection of  the large share of spending on computers and related items in  those sectors.

The cyclical timing of  contractions and expansions in  real GDP were little changed by  the revision. However, the 1990-91 recession now shows a  2 percent peak-to-trough decline in real output as  opposed to  the 1-1/2 percent drop previously estimated using 1987 dollars. And average growth between the first quarter of 1991 and the third quarter of 1995 is now estimated at 2.5 percent, 0.6 percentage point less than in the previously published 1987dollar estimates.

With regard to these most recent years, real GDP growth was unchanged at 3.7 percent in 1992 but  was revised down nearly

- 1. These effects are calculated as the difference between the growth rates in  constant 1987-dollar GDP and the previously published chain-weighted GDP index.
- 2. Two  minor changes are the following: (1)  The trough in real GDP during the 1969-70 recession now occurs in  the first quarter of 1970 instead of  the second quarter of 1970, and (2)  the trough in real GDP during the 1980 recession occurs in  the third quarter instead of  the second quarter.

1  percentage point, to 2.2 percent, in 1993 and down 0.6 percentage point, to 3.5 percent, in 1994. Over the first three quarters of 1995, real GDP growth was revised down 1.3 percentage points, to a 1.4 percent annual rate. The move to chain weighting accounted for 0.8 percentage point of  the downward revision to growth in  1993, 0.4 percentage point of  the revision in 1994, and 0.9 percentage point of  the lower growth estimate during the first three quarters of 1995.

Revisions to current-dollar GDP

Annual levels of  current-dollar GDP were revised up  between 2-1/4 percent and 3-3/4 percent over the revision period. Between 1990 and 1994. the upward revisions averaged about $200 billion. Definitional and classification changes--as opposed to  new source data--accounted for about 60 percent of these recent revisions and for an  even greater proportion of  the changes further back in history.

Among the components of  current-dollar GDP, the largest revisions occurred in the government sector and for the most part reflect the definitional change of government consumption to include the flow of  services provided by  government-owned structures and equipment (including military). These flows are set equal to the estimates of  the depreciation of government-owned assets; this depreciation is now  also included in  the consumption of  fixed capital for the economy. Accordingly, while the redefinition in the government accounts results in  higher gross domestic product, the offset in  consumption of capital implies that the new system has no effect on  net domestic product.

Personal consumption expenditures also were revised up. Much of  the revision begins to take place in  the early 1980s and in large part reflects the  wedging in  of new  estimates of owner-occupied housing services based on  information from the 1991 Residential Finance Survey. Spending on  nondurables was revised up  beginning in the late 1960s, primarily because of higher spending on restaurant meals. Outlays for durable goods were revised down starting in 1991, in  part because of  more accurate measures of average prices paid for  new cars. These revisions to motor vehicle purchases also reduced outlays for producers' durable equipment, as did new estimates of spending on  communications equipment.

On  balance, the revisions to exports and imports were relatively small. Estimates of  current-dollar inventory stocks generally were revised down somewhat, which, along with the  higher figures for final sales, resulted in  a  lower level of the inventoryto-sales ratio. The current-dollar inventory-to-sales ratio moves in the same general pattern as it  did before the revision. However, the revised ratio of  real inventories to real final sales shows less

- 3.  Measuring the service flows from government-owned assets with the assets' depreciation implicitly assumes that the net rate of return on  these items is zero. BEA recognizes this conceptual problem. However, they felt their estimates were the best they could construct for now, especially given the lack of  consensus on the best way to  measure the rate of return on  government-owned capital. And, overall, BEA  believes that the improvements to the NIPA from the changes in government accounting more than outweigh the potential mismeasurement problems arising from the zero net return assumption.

of a  downtrend in  the early 1990s and a  more noticeable upward movement in 1994-95 than did the previously published data (chart)

Revisions to  the Income Side of  the Accounts

A  major revision to the income side of  the accounts occurred in the calculation of  depreciation of equipment and structures. In computing equipment and motor vehicles, BEA is  now  using prices of used equipment to estimate depreciation. Elsewhere, BEA replaced their previous straight-line-type depreciation methodology with geometric--or constant percentage--depreciation. For long-lived assets, such as housing, the new  method tends to lower average depreciation. For short-lived assets, such as many types of business equipment, average depreciation is increased.

Because rental income is  net of  the depreciation of  the housing stock, the new  depreciation measures (and the higher estimates for space rent) boosted rental income significantly. Personal income also was raised in  the 1980s and 1990s by  higher estimates of other labor income, reflecting new  estimates of  employer contributions to health insurance and pension plans. BEA also recognized that their prior estimates had not adequately captured voluntary pre-tax contributions by employees to thrift savings plans. Revised estimates of  these contributions boosted wage and salary income beginning in 1979, with the increases tapering off in recent years. In 1994, however, wages and salaries were revised down significantly on  net, as a  result of  revised compilations from unemployment insurance data. With the exception of  1988-90. personal income also was reduced by  lower estimates of  nonfarm proprietors' income.

All told, the new  estimates of income and outlays resulted in upward revisions to the personal saving rate of  roughly 3/4 percentage point between 1987 and 1991 and 0.4 percentage point in 1992 and 1993, but they lowered the saving rate by  0.3 percentage point in  1994 (chart) On  balance, the saving rate was not revised much over the first three quarters of 1995. In  contrast, the increases in  depreciation and other revisions lowered economic profits over the bulk of the revision period (chart)

The changes in  government sector accounting also affected the NIPA definitions of  the federal government's and the state and local governments' surpluses and deficits. These concepts now explicitly are defined on  a  current-account basis and are measured by  the difference between receipts and government consumption expenditures, transfers, net interest, and other current expenditures. Relative to  the previously published deficit calculations, expenditures no

- 4.  Studies of  used equipment prices generally find that the dollar value lost in  the first year of operation exceeds the loss during the second year, the loss in the second year of operation exceeds that in  the third year, and so on. The patterns of  these dollar losses generally are well described by  a  geometric--or constant percentage--loss in  value.
- 5.  The higher estimates of  health insurance contributions come from revised estimates from the Health Financing Administration. The new  estimates of employer contributions to pension plans largely result from BEA  changing their source of  pension contributions from corporate tax returns to IRS Form 5500.
- 6.  The revisions reflect the changes in depreciation, incorporation of  new tax  return data, and updated estimates of tax compliance.

longer include gross investment, but now  include the depreciation of government-owned capital. The changes were especially large for the state and local sector, where gross investment generally exceeds depreciation by  a  wide margin. After accounting for these and other revisions, the state and local sector is now  estimated to  be showing surpluses (excluding social insurance funds) equal to about 1/2 percent of  GDP in  recent years; earlier estimates had shown deficits equal to about 1/2 percent of  GDP (chart).

Revisions to Productivity

BLS will be releasing revised productivity figures based on BEA's new  estimates of output. The Board staff estimates that the revised data will show that the growth of output per hour in  the nonfarm business sector (excluding housing) averaged 1.8 percent per year during the 1960-94 period, 0.2 percentage point higher than previously reported in  the 1987-dollar-based series. We  estimate that labor productivity growth over 1988-94 will be  0.9 percent at an  annual rate. 0.3 percentage point below the earlier estimates. On  balance, the lower growth reflects the switch from  measuring nonfarm business output from the income side of  the accounts using constant 1987 dollars to  measuring output from the spending side of  the accounts using chain-weighted data.

Revisions to Real GDP Growth (Percentage points, annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1 Growth between 1994:Q4 and 1995:Q3, annual rate.
- 1 Largely reflects revisions to prices.
- 2. Growth between 1994:Q4 and 1995:Q3, annual rate.

<!-- missing-text -->

Ratio  of otal  Inventories  o  Final  Sales T t

Current Dollars

<!-- missing-text -->

Revisions to Personal  Saving  Rate and  Profit hare S

Personal Saving Rate

Percent

<!-- missing-text -->

Profits  s a Share of  GNP a

<!-- missing-text -->

Government Current Account  Surplus

(As a percent  of  GDP)

<!-- missing-text -->

APPENDIX B

EFFECTS OF  THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN AND  EAST COAST BLIZZARD ON  DATA QUALITY

Summary

We  have been querying the staffs at  the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics concerning the effects of the government shutdowns and the East Coast snowstorm on  the agencies' statistical releases. Most releases will be  published several weeks late because of delayed surveys and lost processing time. (The  attached table contains the current tentative release schedule.)

The delays ought to allow Census and BLS to process enough data so  that survey coverage and data quality will not  be  severely compromised. However, a  problem may arise with the CPI, PPI and housing data: Their monthly percent changes could be distorted because some source data are being gathered at different times of the month than  they usually are.

Retail Sales

Data on  retail sales for November (preliminary) and December (advance) are scheduled to  be released January 30, and the January advance report is planned for February 28. Both releases are a  bit more than two  weeks later in  the month than originally scheduled. Our  contact at  Census indicated that normal procedures are being followed and that the data will be  in good shape. Indeed, our contact indicated that the advance data might be  a  bit better than usual: Because of  the delay in  collecting the data. Census should be  able to pick up some late reporters that otherwise would not have been incorporated until the second estimate.

Business Fixed Investment

The reports on  manufacturers' orders and shipments of  durable goods for November and December will be released together on February 15.

About one-third of the respondents to  the M-3 survey provide their data using touchtone phones, and these responses were unaffected by the government shutdowns and the snowstorm. The other respondents fill in  surveys mailed to them by the Census Bureau. The  November survey was  mailed on  time, and Census feels the monthand-a-half delay in  publication will enable them to process sufficient information to allow the November report to  be  the "final" data for the month. The December survey was mailed January 11, about two weeks later than normal. Census feels the three-week delay in publication of  these data will enable them to process about as many responses as they usually do for a  "preliminary" report,

Data on  construction put-in-place for November and December also will be  published together on February 15. These data are based on  surveys of  builders. Construction permits for  November are scheduled to be  released January 25, and permits for December likely

will follow about two weeks after that. These data are based on surveys of  permit-issuing offices. The November surveys for both construction-put-in-place and permits were mailed on  their normal schedule, but the December questionnaires went out about two weeks late.

Inventories

Manufacturing inventories for November and December will be released on February 15 in  conjunction with the manufacturers' orders and shipments data. The wholesale inventory data for November were released on January 26, and the retail inventory data for  November are scheduled to be  published during the week of February 12. Trade sector inventory data are collected in the same surveys as  those that gather the monthly sales data. Our contacts did not anticipate any problems affecting data quality. Although the November retail surveys were mailed late, the publication delay ought to allow Census to  maintain at least the usual survey coverage; in fact, our contacts felt the delays might result in improved response rates. However, our contacts indicated that they are far enough behind in processing data that the wholesale and retail reports for December, January, and possibly February also will be  delayed.

Housing

Housing starts and permits for both December and  January are scheduled to be released on  February 23.

The principal housing data stem from field samples of  permit offices (in  permit-issuing places) and of  housing starts (in  nonpermit areas) by the Census Bureau. These surveys were delayed in January by the government shutdown. Furthermore, the snowstorm may have prevented some site visits in  non-permit-issuing areas. The storm also may  have blocked some site interviews in  permit-issuing places that are used to augment the regular telephone follow-ups that identify when construction on  units with permits is started and when units for sale are sold.

These delays and the missed sampling can cause a  variety of problems. First, smaller samples increase statistical noise. Second, some permit offices have very poor recordkeeping, and our Census contacts are concerned that the delays may  make it  more difficult than usual to  correctly allocate permits from  these offices between December and January. Finally, Census uses the reported permit and start data to impute values for late responses and for starts that occur before permit issuance. Similar imputations are  made for sales of  units that occur before permit issuance. When sampling is delayed--as it  was in  January--Census may receive more responses than usual, so  that automatic application of  the regular imputation factors would result in  an  overestimate of starts and sales. Census does not plan to change its imputation methods to account for this possibility.

International Trade

The international trade data for November, originally scheduled for publication on  January 19, are now scheduled to be  released the week of  February 5. Customs agents were at  work during both government shutdowns, and all import and export documents were collected as usual Pushing back the publication date will allow for full compilation of  all statistics (including late reporters) with no reduction in data quality.

Prices

The December PPI will be  released on  January 31 and the December CPI on February 1; these publication dates are about two weeks later than usual. The January PPI is scheduled for release, as  originally scheduled, on  February 14, but  the January CPI likely will be delayed about two  weeks, to February 28.

Our CPI contact at BLS estimated that the number of  price quotes incorporated in  the December CPI will have been only about 2 percent less than the number used in  last December's index. Our contact would not venture a  guess on  what the sample coverage would be  in  the January index. To get as large a  sample as  possible, BLS is  allowing more than the usual amount of telephone interviewing in place of  on-site data collection when needed--for example, when snow prevented site visits. Still, smaller sample sizes could increase the statistical noise in  the CPI.

The CPI also will be  affected by  changes in  the timing of  data collection. In anticipation of  the government shutdown, BLS accelerated its data collection last month; in contrast, the shutdown is delaying data collection in January. All else equal, these timing perturbations will trim  the monthly percent change in  the CPI in  December and February but boost the change in January; however, given underlying inflation rates, the Board staff estimates that the distortions ought to be  less than 0.1 percentage point per  month. BLS  will not make any statistical adjustments to account for the timing problems, but it plans to include an explanation of the procedural changes in  the CPI press release.

Our PPI contact did not see any problems with the quality of the December data: The forms went out on the usual schedule, and since then, responses have "just been piling up in the mail room." Some problems may occur in  January, however. Normally, the forms would have been in  respondents' hands by  the January 9  pricing date for the PPI; instead the forms were mailed out between January 11 and January 19. This delay means that prices for the 9th will be based on  memory, which risks errors in  recall or  the substitution of prices from later in  the month. On  the other hand, BLS does not expect any sample attrition due to the late mailings or  the snowstorm.

3 Ordinarily, the CPI price quotes for January through October are collected during the first eighteen working days of  the month; due to  the extra holidays, data for November and December usually are collected during the first fifteen working days of the month. After accounting for weekends and holidays, without the shutdown, last month's price quotes would have been collected by  December 21 and this month's data would be  in  by  January 26. Instead, the December data probably were collected by  the 15th, and the January price quotes will be  gathered between the 8th and the 31st.

Labor Markets

As  noted in the labor market section, the government shutdown prevented BLS from providing its usual revisions to  the November establishment survey. As a  result, the levels of  employment, hours, and earnings in  November and December may contain more statistical noise than usual. The December establishment survey data were transmitted late to the BLS by the state offices. This delay resulted in  larger-than-usual response rates, which may  have improved the estimates of  the change in employment between November and December. On  the other hand, the survey may have been affected by the compressed time available to process the data by BLS staff. Indeed, Board staff observed some anomalies in  the four-digit SIC manufacturing data used in  the construction of  the industrial production index, and we  are concerned that similar aberrations may exist in  the data outside of  manufacturing.

The January establishment survey also was collected late, but the follow-ups are on schedule. With short time, the process used to review revisions to data in  December will be slightly less complete than usual. Otherwise, in  the absence of  another shutdown, processing should proceed according to normal procedures. The January labor market report is scheduled to  be released on February 2, its regular publication date.

The December household survey was collected according to the usual schedule, and the follow-ups were completed on  time. Although the response rate was lower than usual, BLS considers the sample coverage to be adequate. However, the introduction of  new seasonal factors, which usually takes place in  December, has been postponed. The January household survey is being conducted this week according to the regular schedule.

The employment cost index for the fourth quarter will be delayed from January 30 to February 13. However, because the data are drawn from permanent payroll records, data quality should be unaffected.

- 5. The household survey was collected during the week of  December 5, but BLS ordinarily collects the  December household survey a  week early to avoid reporting problems around the holidays. Still, the response rate to the December survey was somewhat lower than usual; responses were unavailable from 9.2 percent of the households in  the CPS sample, as compared with the 6.2 percent to 7.2 percent nonresponse rate usually experienced.

Statistical Release Schedule (Tentative)

<!-- missing-text -->

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Selected inancial  arket Quotations F M 1

e

(Percent  xcept s  noted)

a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1, One-day  quotes xcept s  noted. e a
- 2.  Average  for wo-week  reserve  aintenance eriod  losest  o ate hown.  Last bservation  verage o  date  maintenance  eriod nding anuary t m p c t d s o isa t p e J 31,1996.

m

3.  Secondary arket.

- 4.  Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t 1 a.m. ondon time. f E d a 1 L
- 5. Most recent  bservation sed  on  one-day hursday  quote nd futures rket  index hanges. o ba T a ma c
- 6.  Quotes  for eek ending riday revious  o  date hown. w F p t s

Selected Interest ates R

Short-Term

<!-- missing-text -->

1995

1996

Most market interest rates declined slightly in  the wake of  the System's announcement at the close of  the December FOMC meeting of  a 25 basis point easing in  the intended federal funds rate. Major commercial banks followed the System's action by  lowering the prime rate a  quarter point to 8-1/2 percent.

After this initial reaction, interest rates have fluctuated widely in response to incoming news about the economy and the federal budget On  balance, market participants seem  to  anticipate at least a  near-term dose of federal expenditure restraint and have interpreted incoming data as suggesting only modest economic growth. Consequently, they have built in greater likelihood for a  further easing in System policy, and interest rates have declined somewhat. Treasury note and bond yields are currently down about 10 basis points to 30 basis points. Interest rate declines have helped bolster stock prices; major equity indexes are up about 2  percent to 3-1/2 percent from their levels at the time of the December FOMC meeting.

Gross public issuance of  bonds by  nonfinancial corporations dropped off  in late December but has bounced back in  January With long-term interest rates remaining close to their recent lows, corporations have continued to favor longer-term financing. In  the household sector survey data on  loan applications point to a  pickup in  home mortgage borrowing; however growth of consumer credit in November was somewhat less robust than in  earlier months. In  the state and local sector, the volume of  outstanding tax-exempt bonds contracted about $11 billion in  the fourth quarter Federal borrowing was relatively weak last quarter: spending was constrained

MONETARY AGGREGATES

(Based on  seasonally adjusted data)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. For the years shown, fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter percent change. For the quarters shown, based on quarterly averages-
- 2. Sum  of seasonally adjusted MI, retail money market funds, savings deposits, and  small time deposits.
- 3. sum  of retail money funds, savings deposits, and  small time deposits, each seasonally adjusted separately.
- 4. Sum  of large time deposits, institutional money funds, RP  liabilities of depository institutions, and Eurodollars held  by  U.S. addressees, each seasonally adjusted separately.
- 5 Net of holdings of depository institutions, money market mutual funds, U.s. government, and foreign banks and  official institutions.
- 6. M2 less demand deposits
- 7. For the  years shown, "average monthly change' is  the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter dollar change, divided by  12. For the  quarters shown, it is  the quarter-to-quarter dollar change, divided by  3. p-Preliminary. n.s.a.--Not seasonally adjusted.

Note: Data incorporate revisions from the annual benchmark and  seasonal review, as  well as a  redefinition of the  M2 aggregate, involving a  shift of  overnight RPs and  Eurodollars to  non-M2 M3-

by  the federal budget impasse, and the Treasury placed greater-thanusual reliance on  its cash balance because of  the debt ceiling constraint

Monetary Aggregates and Bank Credit 1

The growth rates of  the broad monetary aggregates picked up in December but they remained below the levels posted in  the spring. M2 expanded at about a  5-3/4 percent annual pace in  December, buoyed by strong growth in savings deposits (table) 2 Part of  the surge in savings deposits reflected a  shift of  funds from  OCDs (other checkable deposits) resulting from new sweep programs at nine additional bank holding companies. Still adjusted for sweeps, savings deposits grew at a  5-1/2 percent annual rate. Growth of retail money market funds remained strong in December as the spread of rates on  money market instruments over those on  money funds narrowed, and the continued flatness of  the yield curve provided little incentive for investors to  turn to longer maturity instruments. Growth in M2  appears to have increased a  bit further in January.

M1 fell at a  4-1/2 percent annual rate in  December, as  the OCD sweep programs cut 10 percentage points from the growth rate of  this aggregate. The decline in  OCDs offset increased strength in other M1 components. Demand deposits grew at a  5  percent pace, boosted in part by  an increase in  mortgage refinancings (associated prepayments of securitized mortgages are temporarily held in liquid deposits)

III-4

COMMERCIAL BANK CREDIT

(Percentage  hange; easonally justed  nnual ate) c s ad a r 1

<!-- missing-text -->

Currency growth also has picked up in recent months, after slow expansion in  the summer and early fall

M3 expanded slightly more than 6  percent during 1995, just above the upper limit of  its annual growth cone Growth was more modest last month, however, at about a  4-1/4 percent annual pace, reflecting a  drop in  its non-M2 components. Growth of large time deposits slowed further largely because of  a  drop at agencies and branches of  foreign banks, whose assets continued contracting in December M3 in  January appears to have accelerated, boosted by strong inflows to institution-only money funds. Large time deposits also appear to have picked up, and RPs have turned around.

Bank credit expanded quite sluggishly in December for the third consecutive month (table) Securities holdings increased, but the gains were the result of  revaluations rather than purchases. Indeed banks sold securities on  net likely reflecting in part a temporary easing of  the accounting rules regarding sales of securities categorized as held-to-maturity. 3 Weakness in all major categories reduced loan growth in  December to a  sluggish 1-1/4 percent annual pace. Growth of  business loans late last year likely was held down in part by some substitution toward capital market financing by  nonfinancial businesses Nonetheless, preliminary data for January suggest that business loan growth has strengthened noticeably, Growth of real estate loans also appears to have picked up in  early January after having fallen at a 3  percent annual rate in December; the strength in  January is largely attributable to bank acquisitions of  thrifts.

In  the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, banks indicated no change, on  net, in standards for approving home mortgages and a  slight increase in demand for these loans. Nevertheless, a  third of  the domestic respondents indicated they had experienced a  slowdown in recent months in  the growth of residential mortgages on  their books. Banks indicating such a  slowdown placed equal importance on reduced originations--reflecting partly a seasonally weaker housing market--and increased securitization of real estate loans as reasons for the slowing.

Despite some market fears that declining asset quality could constrain bank profitability, earnings at large bank holding companies were strong last quarter. Bank profits were buoyed by loan growth, reduced deposit insurance premiums, and industry efforts to cut costs. The increase in loans helped support net interest margins last year, as banks shifted their portfolios away from securities, which generally carry lower yields. Although margins at  the large holding companies narrowed some from the yearearlier quarter, average margins remained high by  historical standards. Trading results were mixed but evidently improved on balance. On  the down side, provisions for loan losses and chargeoffs of  nonperforming loans increased at many banks, but the rises were generally modest.

Mutual Funds

Net sales of  long-term mutual funds increased in  November and December, largely reflecting continued strong inflows into equity funds (table). Investor demand for domestic equity funds held firm, and interest in international equity funds picked up. Although a sizable portion of  the recent inflows is  attributable to reinvested distributions, mutual fund complexes report that net new sales of stock funds also remained strong, despite the potential tax

liability from capital gains distributions. Spurred by  the highest total returns since 1991, net sales of stock funds for all of 1995 totaled a  record $144 billion, surpassing the previous high reached in 1993. Preliminary data indicate that stock fund inflows remained heavy through mid-January.

<!-- missing-text -->

-

--------

Source. Investment Company Institute.

Income and high-yield bond funds accounted for virtually all of the net sales of bond funds last year, and they continued to post inflows in  December and early January. Funds in  the income category contain some equity exposure, which partly accounts for the strong investor interest in such funds. For the past year as a  whole, bond funds registered positive net sales, reversing the outflows in 1994 but falling far short of  the record pace in 1993.

GROSS OFFERINGS OF  SECURITIES BY U.S. CORPORATIONS 1 (Billions of dollars; monthly rates, not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

- 3. Included in lines for stocks above.
- 4. Bonds categorized according to Moody's bond ratings, or  to  Standard &amp;amp;  Poor's if unrated by  Moody's. Excludes mortgage-backed and asset-backed bonds.

Business Finance

Gross public bond offerings by  nonfinancial corporations were light in  the second half of  December, reflecting the seasonal slowdown in  activity around the holidays (table). This lull followed a  spurt of  issuance during the fall, when companies took advantage of the decline in  bond rates to lock in favorable longterm funding and to repay short-term debt. The incentive to pursue this strategy remains strong, and  the pace of offerings has picked up in recent weeks; moreover, the calendar of  prospective issues is quite heavy.

Credit quality in  the nonfinancial corporate sector appears to remain strong although there are a  few signs of deterioration. Interest rate spreads on  both investment-grade and high-yield bonds have crept up since early 1995, but they remain relatively low  by historical standards (chart, upper panels). The default rate on high-yield bonds increased in 1995 to 2.7 percent of  face value, but that rate is below the average over the past decade (chart, lower left panel). Balance sheets at nonfinancial corporations appear to remain healthy on  the whole; interest-coverage ratios and debt-toasset ratios remain in good condition. In addition, 1995 was the first year since the mid-1980s in  which the value of debt upgraded exceeded the value downgraded (chart, lower right panel). That said, rating changes in  the fourth quarter alone were not as favorable as those earlier in  the year, as Moody's upgraded only $15 billion of nonfinancial debt while downgrading $27 billion. Moreover, banks reported some small move toward tighter underwriting standards for business loans in  the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, owing to concerns about the economy. [See the appendix for a  more detailed discussion of the survey results.]

Corporate  Credit  Quality

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Default  Rate on High-Yield onds B

10

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Announced Stock Repurchase Programs at  Nonfinancial Corporations

<!-- missing-text -->

Megamerger Activity  f  U.S. Nonfinancial Corporations o 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Deals in  which the  value  of  the  target  s  $1  billion   greater  Excludes  acquisitions  hich  the target ompany i or inw c remains an independent entity after the  transaction.
- 2.  Includes  payments  to  target ompany's shareholders  in c the form of  cash  or ebt,  as well  as stock  swaps  between  a d foreign cquirer  and a U.S. target. a

Gross equity issuance by  nonfinancial firms slowed in December from the fast pace in  October and November. Issuance during the first half of  January also was modest, likely reflecting the slowdown that typically occurs as underwriters wait to obtain yearend financial data from  prospective issuers. The pace of issuance has picked up some of late, and market sources anticipate a substantial flow of  offerings in  the near term.

The numerous stock repurchase programs under way, along with share retirements through mergers, have continued to overwhelm gross equity issuance. Nonfinancial corporations announced repurchase programs totaling nearly $70 billion in 1995, with $19 billion of planned repurchases announced during the fourth quarter alone (chart, upper panel). Repurchases have been concentrated among successful industrial companies whose profits continue to exceed their needs for cash. Indeed, in the fourth quarter, just four companies together accounted for about one-third of  the announced repurchase volume.

Merger-related stock retirements have also continued to  be substantial (chart, lower panel). In  1995, megamergers (deals in which the target's equity is valued at  $1 billion or  more) resulted in equity retirements at nonfinancial firms totaling almost $55 billion. (All  told, megamergers accounted for about 60  percent of  merger-related equity retirements last year.) Another $2  billion in  equity was retired during the first weeks of 1996, and recently proposed megamergers would retire another $25 billion in equity. Most of  the recent deals have not sparked concerns about a  slippage in credit quality, reflecting both the limited amount of  debt financing and the potential for increased profits at the newly combined firms. Of  approximately $100 billion in  completed megamergers last year, more than two-thirds of  the combinations

Stock Price Indexes

Index,

6, 1995=100

Jan.

6, 1995=100

occurred in  just three industries that are undergoing structural change--telecommunications and media, health care and pharmaceuticals, and defense.

Most broad indexes of stock prices have risen 2  percent to 3-1/2 percent on  net from their levels just before the December FOMC meeting, boosted by  the decline in long-term interest rates (chart, top panel). Stock prices sagged temporarily because of  worries about the strength of  corporate earnings. A  number of  companies, mostly in  the computer sector, warned analysts that earnings were likely to be disappointing, and the warnings prompted some analysts to revise down their estimates of  fourth-quarter earnings ahead of the formal announcements. However, on  balance, earnings reports to date have come in somewhat above the revised forecasts. Notable positive surprises include IBM, Intel, and Microsoft; the latter two helped the Nasdaq computer index to retrace part of  its sharp decline around year-end (chart, lower panel).

Treasury and Agency Financing

The staff expects the federal budget deficit to  total close to $100 billion in  the first quarter. The Treasury is expected to finance the shortfall by  borrowing a  roughly equivalent amount in the market, raising about one quarter of  the amount in  coupon auctions and the remainder in  bills. The Treasury announced reductions in  the sizes of  its weekly bill auctions for the third and fourth weeks of  January to  make room under the debt ceiling for the two-year and five-year notes that settle January 31. However, the staff expects that the Treasury will need to  raise weekly bill auction sizes by quarter-end to  make up for the earlier paydown. In addition, the Treasury is expected to auction a  sizable amount of cash management bills. The staff's assumptions for Treasury

financing are contingent upon some resolution of  the debt ceiling problem.

On  January 22, Secretary Rubin notified the Congress that the Treasury would take further steps to make room under the current $4.9 trillion debt ceiling. These steps include replacing securities that are subject to the limit and currently held in  the Exchange Stabilization Fund (about $4  billion) with obligations that are not subject to the limit. Additionally, about $9  billion of securities of  the Federal Financing Bank will replace Treasury obligations held by  various government trust funds. The Secretary also made the determination that the debt ceiling problem will last somewhat longer than was projected in  mid-November, which permits him  to disinvest an  additional $6-1/2 billion of  Treasury debt held by  the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund. All told, these actions lower debt outstanding subject to limit $19-1/2 billion, making room for a  like amount of issuance of marketable debt.

The Treasury's need to borrow in  the first quarter, however, outstrips this additional scope for borrowing. Absent further steps, which Secretary Rubin has told the Congress are of questionable legality, or an  increase in  the debt ceiling, the Treasury has indicated that it  will likely deplete its cash balances and exhaust room under the current debt ceiling at the end of February or  early March. It appears that the markets are expecting that the debt ceiling will be  raised or  that the Treasury will turn to other measures to avoid default, as Treasury prices do  not appear to contain a  default premium.

Debt issuance by federal agencies appears to have increased in early January from the  moderate pace of  the latter half of 1995. Much of  the new  debt is intended to refinance securities that have

been called. New issues have been primarily noncallable debentures, including the first-ever noncallable bond offering by  the Tennessee Valley Authority, but offerings of callable debt remain sizable. Despite the  pickup in issuance, spreads in  the primary market for noncallable debentures have remained stable.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Excludes mortgage pass-through securities issued by  FNMA and FHLMC.

n.a. Not available.

State and Local Government Finance

Low  long-term interest rates continued to boost gross offerings of  municipal securities in  December (table). For the fourth quarter as a whole, both new  capital issuance and refundings were at the highest quarterly levels in roughly two years. Market activity was slow in  early January, consistent with the usual seasonal pattern, but issuance has picked up of  late.

Gross issuance of  tax-exempt bonds over all of  1995, was down slightly from its 1994 level. In  contrast, retirements increased last year, as a  large volume of advance-refunded debt became eligible to be called. With the bulge in retirements, outstanding long-term debt is estimated to have fallen more than $50 billion in

1995. The downtrend in outstandings will probably persist for some time, as a  considerable amount of  pre-refunded debt has not yet been retired. Market analysts expect that gross debt retirements this year will again outpace gross offerings, with the range of estimates centering on  a  decline in outstanding debt of  about $30 billion.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Includes issues for public and private purposes.

Recent declines in  municipal bond yields have about matched those on  Treasuries, leaving the long-term tax-exempt to  taxable ratio little changed from the elevated level that generally has prevailed since last spring. In contrast, the one-year yield ratio has increased quite a  bit since early December and now  hovers around 0.71, compared with a  low of 0.62 reached last fall. Trade reports indicate that most of  this increase reflects concerns over the Administration's budget proposal to eliminate a  tax advantage for corporations that typically buy short-term tax-exempt debt. If the proposal is enacted, many corporations will reduce their demand

for short-term paper, much as the 1986 tax reform reduced commercial bank demand for municipal debt.

Credit spreads on long-term municipal bonds have changed little on balance since the beginning of 1995. The spread between the Baa-rated general obligation bond and a  comparable AAA-rated bond stood at about 60 basis points in  mid-January, about the same as in December.

Mortgage Markets

Interest rates on  home mortgages declined on  net over the intermeeting period. The average contract rate on conventional thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages dropped roughly 15 basis points, while the average initial rate on  adjustable-rate mortgages indexed to the one-year Treasury constant maturity yield declined about 18 basis points. The FRM-ARM initial rate spread remains near its lowest level since August 1990 (chart, upper panel).

The flatness in  the mortgage yield curve and the low absolute level of  FRM rates have contributed to a  sizable FRM  share of conventional mortgage originations. The Federal Housing Finance Board reported last month that the FRM share climbed to 81 percent in November, the highest since November 1993. Signs that homebuyers may  be responding to lower rates are evident in  the Mortgage Bankers Association's (MBA) index of applications for loans to purchase new and existing homes. Apart from a  weather-related drop in  midJanuary, the MBA's purchase index (seasonally adjusted by  Board staff) has fluctuated over much of  the intermeeting period at the highest levels in its six-year history (chart). Refinancing activity also appears to have increased, but it remains well below the record levels reached in 1993.

In  secondary mortgage markets, gross issuance of agency-backed pass-through securities is estimated to  have increased further in

ARM Origination  Proportion and  FRM-ARM Spread

(Not  seasonally  adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Issuance of  Agency Mortgage Pass-Through Securities

<!-- missing-text -->

MBA Indexes of  Mortgage Loan Applications

Purchase Index

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. March  16, 1990 = 100.
- 2. Seasonally  acdusted by FRB  staff

Refinancing  Index

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. March  16, 1990=  100.
- 2.  Seasonally  adjusted  by FRB  staff.

December boosting total offerings in  the fourth quarter to the highest quarterly figure in  more than a  year. Still gross issuance remained well below the average quarterly pace of  $142 billion in 1993. For 1995 as a  whole, gross issuance of  agency pass-throughs totaled $269 billion, owing largely to  the historically low  volumes registered in  the first two quarters of  the year Issuance of agency-backed CMO (collateralized mortgage obligation) and REMIC (real estate mortgage investment conduit) securities totaled $23 billion last year, just a  fraction of  the roughly $120 billion issued in 1994

Consumer Credit

Consumer installment credit outstanding grew at a  seasonally adjusted annual rate of 10-1/2 percent in  November down from 13-3/4 percent in October (table) While fluctuating from  month to month, growth of consumer credit appears to  have slowed noticeably since earlier in 1995 This slowing reflects a  sharp deceleration in revolving credit from rates above 20 percent earlier in  the year to under 12 percent in  the second half Some drop-off in  revolving credit was expected, given rising debt burdens and softness in retail sales. Auto credit in contrast grew a  bit more rapidly in recent months than earlier last year as  manufacturers' incentives (lower financing rates and rebates) apparently induced some consumers to switch from leasing to outright purchase of  autos, The January survey of loan officers indicated that banks, on  net, have not changed the terms on auto loans or credit cards over recent months. But some respondents reportedly had tightened standards for approving such loans (appendix)

Interest rates on  new cars and personal loans at commercial banks were unchanged between August and November while the average new-car rate at "captive" finance companies edged down slightly.

GROWTH OF  CONSUMER CREDIT

(Percent change; seasonally adjusted annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

- * Through November.
- r Revised.

INTEREST RATES ON  CONSUMER LOANS

(Annual percentage rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Annual data are averages of  quarterly data for commercial bank rates and of  monthly data for auto finance company rates.

- 1. Average of "most common" rate charged for  specified type and maturity durin the first week of  the midd.le month of  each quarter. g
- 2. The rate for all accounts is the stated APR averaged across all credit card accounts at  all reporting banks. The rate for accounts assessed interest is the annualized ratio of total finance charges at  all reporting banks to  the total average daily balances against which the finance charges were assessed (excludes accounts for  which no finance charges were assessed).
- 3. For monthly data. rate for all loans of  each type made during the  month regardless of  maturity.

n.a. Not available.

Over the full year, loan rates declined much less than did yields on Treasury securities of  comparable maturities, so rate spreads rose substantially from  very low levels to above-average levels (chart). Still, new-car loan rates, at about 9-1/2 percent at banks, are in a historically low range, at least in nominal terms. From 1972, when the series began, until 1993, rates had never broken below 10 percent.

Preliminary data suggest that securitization of  consumer loans continued apace in  the final quarter of 1995. Fourth-quarter issuance of  credit card, auto, and "other" asset-backed securities is  estimated at about $25 billion, bringing the total for the past year as a  whole to $81 billion--well above the previous record total of $51 billion in 1994.

Despite statistical and anecdotal evidence of rising delinquency rates for credit card accounts, investors do  not appear greatly concerned about the risk of  holding such securities. Rate spreads on  credit-card-backed securities were at historically low  levels late last year (chart), notwithstanding a  large volume of supply. The current market reaction is in contrast to that in 1991, when rising delinquency rates contributed to  a  steep rise in rate spreads.

Several factors may  help explain the  market's limited concern about credit quality. One is  that although credit card delinquencies have risen considerably in  anecdotal reports and some statistical measures, Moody's delinquency rate series on  securitized credit card receivables was quite low  in  October (latest available reading), although up a  little from its lowest point (chart).

Rate  Spread  on Consumer Loans  at  Commercial Banks

(Consumer  rate  less  yield n  three-year  reasury  notes) o T

<!-- missing-text -->

Delinquency  Rate on Securitized  Cards

Basis  points

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Also, experience in the 1990-91 recession, when virtually every credit-card-backed security survived without a  mishap, may have made investors more comfortable with holding such securities when delinquency rates are rising. Moreover by  comparison with some other possible investment vehicles, card-backed securities may look quite attractive. Investor disaffection with CMOs, for instance, after several well-publicized cases of large investment losses in 1994, is likely boosting demand for card-backed securities. Demand by foreign investors reportedly has been particularly strong.

APPENDIX

THE JANUARY SENIOR LOAN OFFICER OPINION SURVEY ON BANK LENDING PRACTICES

The January 1996 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on  Bank Lending Practices posed questions about changes in  bank lending standards and terms, changes in  loan demand by  businesses and households, the recent weakness in home mortgage lending, and the response of  the banks to a  temporary opportunity to  reclassify their investment account securities. Fifty-eight domestic commercial banks and twenty-two U.S. branches and agencies of  foreign banks participated in  the survey.

The survey results are consistent with a  slight firming of credit standards over the past three months. Small net fractions of banks indicated that they had tightened lending standards for commercial and industrial firms of  all sizes. Standards for commercial real estate loans were also tightened, while standards on home mortgage loans were unchanged, on  net. In response to new questions, banks indicated that they had tightened standards for credit card accounts and auto lending, even though they indicated a slightly increased willingness to make consumer installment loans.

While standards for most types of loans firmed a  bit, a  few banks indicated that they had eased some loan terms. Banks eased terms on  business loans slightly, on net, although the shares that reported having done so  were the smallest in several years. There was little change in  terms on credit card debt or auto loans.

The change in  demand for credit over the past three months was mixed across loan types. Banks reported that demand for  business loans from large and  middle-market firms was little changed, on  net, but demand from small businesses had increased. Banks also reported increased demand for commercial and residential real estate loans. Demand for consumer installment loans weakened, however.

Commercial and Industrial Loans

The January survey found a  modest tightening of standards for approving business loans other than for mergers over the past three months. Between 5  and 10 percent of domestic and foreign banks indicated that they had tightened standards for loans to large, middle-market, and small businesses. This is the first survey to report a  net tightening of  standards on  business loans in the past 3 years.

Significant fractions of  banks reported an  easing of terms on these loans. A  quarter of  the domestic respondents reported a decrease in  the spreads of  loan rates over market rates for loans to large and middle-market firms, while fewer than 10 percent reported a  decrease in spreads on loans to small businesses. As has been the case for some time, smaller fractions of respondents eased other terms, including the cost of credit lines, the size of credit lines, loan covenants, and collateralization requirements. The pace at which banks are easing terms appears to be  slowing: This is the third consecutive survey in  which the share of banks reporting easier terms has fallen. Indeed, for collateralization requirements for small and middle-market borrowers, more banks tightened than

eased standards, the first such net tightening since 1993. Foreign branches and agencies indicated no change, on  net, in terms.

Those banks that tightened their lending standards or terms on business loans attributed this foremost to a  less favorable economic outlook. Those that eased standards or terms did so because of increased competition from other banks and, to a  lesser extent, from nonbank lenders.

Banks reported little change in  demand for loans from large and middle-market firms, but an increase in demand from small businesses. Many of  the banks that experienced an  increase or decrease in  demand for business loans attributed it, in part, to changes in  the financing needs of  their customers for inventory and equipment investment. However, banks that experienced increased demand from large firms attributed much of  the increase to  merger and acquisition financing.

Commercial Real Estate

Small fractions of  both domestic and foreign respondents reported tightening standards on loans for commercial offices and for industrial structures, while about 20 percent indicated they had tightened standards on  construction and land development loans and on other nonfarm nonresidential real estate loans. On  balance, standards for commercial real estate loans were tightened by  a  net share of  banks that was larger than at any  time since the beginning of 1992. Demand for these loans likely increased over the past three months, as a  few  more banks indicated an increase than a decrease in  demand for commercial real estate loans. However, the net share of banks reporting an increase in demand was below the levels reported since May, when this question was added to the survey.

Lending to Households

About a  quarter of  the banks, on  net, indicated they had tightened standards over the past three months for approving new credit card accounts, and a  sixth tightened standards on auto loans. Banks attributed the tightening to  many factors including, in decreasing order of importance, increased delinquency rates, an increased willingness of  households to declare bankruptcy, increased household debt burdens, and a  less favorable economic outlook. On net, about 5  percent of banks indicated a  greater willingness to make consumer installment loans. Although this result seems at odds with the tightening of  standards reported for these loans, the fraction of banks reporting increased willingness, while up slightly from last quarter, remains relatively low. Terms on credit card loans were little changed: A  couple of  banks reduced credit limits, but a  similar number reduced spreads over market rates and reduced the minimum fraction of outstanding balances required to be  repaid each month. Banks reported essentially no change in  terms on auto loans. On  net, respondents reported a  small decline in  demand for consumer installment loans.

Banks indicated no change in  standards for approving home mortgages, and about 15 percent, on net, experienced an  increase in demand for these loans. A  series of special questions explored the reasons for the recent slowing of  the growth in real estate loans on banks' books. A  third of  the domestic respondents indicated they had experienced such a  slowdown. Those banks that had encountered a

slowdown attributed it to  an increased rate at which they were securitizing these loans, reduced loan originations, and increased repayments of  loans refinanced elsewhere. Respondents attributed the increased rate of securitization to demand from households for fixed rate mortgages, which are more likely to be securitized, and to a  need for funds by  their bank. They attributed the slowdown in originations of  these loans to a  weaker housing market in  their region.

Investment Account Securities

Several questions asked the domestic and foreign respondents about the recent SFAS 115 reassessment, which allowed banks to reallocate, on one occasion between November 15 and December 31 1995, their investment account securities between "available for sale" and "held to  maturity" without penalty. A large proportion of  the domestic respondents reported a  substantial shift of  securities into the available-for-sale category. Three-quarters of  the respondents indicated that the resulting shift increased the share of  their investment account securities that are available for sale by  20 percentage points or  more. In  most cases the banks held, rather than immediately sold, the securities that were reclassified. Those banks that reclassified securities did so because of a  desire for increased liquidity and flexibility and also because gains and losses on available-for-sale securities are not reflected in equity for regulatory purposes.

Measures of  Supply and  Demand For C&amp;I  Loans, by Size of  Firm Seeking  Loans

Net Percentage  of  Domestic Respondents Tightening  Standards  for &amp;I Loans C

<!-- missing-text -->

Net

Percentage of  Domestic Respondents

Increasing

Spreads of  Loan Rates Over Base  Rates

<!-- missing-text -->

Net

Percentage  of Domestic

Respondents

Reporting  Stronger Demand for  C&amp;I  Loans

<!-- missing-text -->

Measures of  Supply  and  Demand For Loans  to  Households

Net Percentage of  Domestic Respondents

Tightening  Standards  for ortgages  to  Individuals M

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

U.S. International Trade in  Goods and Services

The deficit for U.S. international trade in goods and services was $8.0 billion in  October, slightly smaller than in the previous two months, and less than averages recorded in  the second and third quarters. Imports declined a  bit more in October than exports declined. The 1  percent decrease in imports was largely in oil (especially quantity) and automotive products. Computer imports, however, recorded another strong rise. For exports, a  drop in agricultural and automotive shipments from relatively strong levels was partly offset by  an  increase to record levels in  machinery exports. Data for November are now  scheduled to be  released during the week of  February 5.

<!-- missing-text -->

Source.  U.S.  Dept. of Commerce, Bureaus of Economic  Analysis  and Census.

In  the third quarter, the deficit was significantly less than in the second quarter. Exports of  goods and services rose 1  percent with increases recorded in  most major categories of  trade. Imports declined 1  percent, with most of  the decrease occurring in categories of  trade that had increased sharply in the second quarter.

Oil Imports

The quantity of  oil imported in  October declined due to lower oil consumption and to a  seasonal inventory drawdown. The amount

U.S. International Trade  in  Goods and  Services

(Seasonally  adjusted annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

U.S. EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF  GOODS AND SERVICES

(Billions of  dollars, SAAR, BOP basis)

<!-- missing-text -->

Census. Source. U.S. Dept. of  Commerce, Bureaus of  Economic Analysis and

imported in October was less than in any  month since last April. Preliminary Department of Energy statistics indicate that in November imports should move back up  reflecting a  build-up in oil inventories.

The price of  imported oil increased slightly in  November after declining in October. The general decline in prices from  May through October reflected concern in world spot markets about an over-abundant world oil supply. In  November, prices increased because of  loss of output in Mexico from late hurricanes, fear of oil workers' strikes in Venezuela and Brazil, and the decision by OPEC to maintain existing production quotas. Spot WTI prices rose sharply in  December (by  over $1.00 per barrel to average $18.77 per barrel) because of colder than normal weather in  North America, Japan, and  Europe, and uncertainty about Saudi Arabian oil policies given the poor health of  King Fahd. Spot WTI rose above $20.00 per barrel in early January as the cold weather persisted and King Fahd temporarily turned over power to Crown Prince Abdullah. Spot WTI fell back below $18.00 per barrel when Iraq requested a  reopening of negotiations with the United Nations for a  limited sale of  oil, and when the temperatures in  the Northern Hemisphere appeared to  be returning to normal.

Prices f o Non-oil Imports and Exports

Prices of  U.S. non-oil imports increased slightly in  November after falling during the previous two  months. Increases in  prices of imported capital goods and foods (both following two months of sizable declines) were partly offset by  a  drop in  the price of imported industrial supplies (primarily metals and selected building supplies).

For October-November combined, compared with the third quarter, prices of  non-oil imports declined 1-1/2 percent at an

<!-- missing-text -->

- e. Average of  two  months.

1-24-96

Oil  Prices

<!-- missing-text -->

annual rate; this follows 10 consecutive quarters of  price increases. The largest declines were in capital goods and foods. Prices of  imported industrial supplies were little changed on average.

Prices of  exports decreased slightly in  November following two months of  very small increases. The decline was attributable to a drop (for the sixth consecutive month) in prices of exported industrial supplies. As in the preceding two months, prices of agricultural exports rose strongly (especially grains).

For October-November combined, compared with the third quarter, prices of  nonagricultural exports declined and prices of agricultural exports increased sharply. As  was the case in  the third quarter, prices of  nonagricultural exports declined as prices of  exported industrial supplies dropped sharply following doubledigit increases from  mid-1994 through mid-1995. Quarterly prices of exported capital goods and consumer goods rose at annual rates of 3 percent or less in 1995.

Data for prices in  December are  now  scheduled to  be released on  February 14.

U.S. International Financial Transactions

Foreign private net purchases of  U.S. securities rebounded strongly in November, to resume the  heady pace set earlier in the year (line 4  of  the Summary of  U.S. International Transactions table). Private security purchases were dampened in  October by large sales of  Treasuries in  the United Kingdom and Japan, which totaled more than $14 billion. In  November these countries recorded purchases of  almost $2  billion. In  both months the offshore centers associated with U.S.-based hedge funds recorded large purchases of Treasuries--in the $15 billion range. This pattern is broadly consistent with press reports stating that foreigners less closely associated with the U.S. markets were particularly concerned about

SUMMARY OF U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS (Billions    dollars, t  seasonally justed  xcept s  noted) of no ad e a

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. The  sum  of official capital, private capital, the current account balance, and  the statistical discrepancy is  zero. Details may  not  sum  to  totals because of  rounding.

- 1. Changes in dollar-denominated positions of all  depository institutions and  bank  holding companies plus certain transactions between broker-dealers and  unaffiliated foreigners (particularly borrowing and  lending under  repurchase agreements). Includes changes in custody liabilities other than U.S. Treasury bills.
- 2. Includes commissions on  securities transactions and  therefore does  not  match exactly the  data  on
- U.S. international transactions published by the Department of Commerce.
- 3. Includes Treasury bills.
- 4. Includes U.S. goverment agency  bonds.
- 5. Transactions by nonbanking concerns and  other  banking and  official transactions not  shown  elsewhere plus  amounts resulting from  adjustments made by the  Department of  Commerce and  revisions in  lines 1 through 5 since  publication of the  quarterly data  in the  Survey of Current Business.

n.a.  Not  available.

Less  than

*

$50

million.

the possibility that the U.S. Treasury might not meet its midNovember obligations.

Foreign net purchases of  corporate and agency bonds also picked up in November, after a  modest slowing in October (line 4b). Nearly all of  the net purchases were in Europe; Japan recorded net sales of  almost $1  billion. Foreign transactions in U.S. stocks swung from  modest net sales in  October to net purchases in  November.

Foreign official reserve assets in  the United States increased by $12-1/2 billion in  November after a  small reduction in October (line 1). The increase is attributable to countries outside the G-10, with particularly large increases coming from China and Thailand. Partial data for December from the FRBNY indicate a  small reduction in official reserves in  the United States.

The large inflows through official transactions and private purchases of  U.S. securities were partially offset by large outflows through banking transactions and U.S. purchases of foreign securities. U.S. net purchases of  foreign stocks and bonds both declined between October and November, but the total remained above $8  billion (line 5). Bond purchases were concentrated in the United Kingdom, providing little information about the residence of  the issuer. Stock purchases were widespread with net purchases in  Japan totaling about $1/2 billion.

Banks and securities dealers reported large net capital outflows in  November (line 3). About $7  billion, or  one-third, of this outflow is attributable to securities dealers' lending associated with RP  transactions. The remaining $14 billion outflow is attributable primarily to transactions between banks and their related foreign offices. The large outflow reported on  an  end-ofmonth basis in the Summary table is largely consistent with daily data reported on  the FR  2950/51. However, the FR  data indicate that this outflow was an end-of-month phenomenon and does not reflect the

general pattern of funding. On a  monthly-average basis, U.S.chartered banks reported a  relatively modest, $4  billion, net outflow vis-a-vis own  foreign offices in  November while foreignchartered banks reported a  $9  billion inflow (lines la and lb of  the International Banking Data table). Bank positions vis-a-vis own foreign offices changed little in December, on a  monthly-average basis.

INTERNATIONAL BANKING DATA

(Billions of  dollars)

<!-- missing-text -->

Lines la,

Ib, and  2a  are

averages of

daily data

reported on  the

FR  2950

and

FR

2951.

Lines

2b  and  3b  are  end-of-period data

reported quarterly

on  the

FFIEC

002s.

Line 3a is  an average of daily data (FR  2050) supplemented by  the FR  2502 and end  of  quarter data  supplied by the  Bank  of Canada and the  Bank of England.  There is  a  break in the  series  n i April 1994.

Lines 4  and  5  are end-of-period data estimated by  BEA  on  the basis of  data provided by  the BIS, the Bank of  England, and  the FR  2502 and  FFIEC 002s. It includes some foreign-currency denominated deposits and loans. Source: SCB

Foreign Exchange Markets

The weighted average value of the dollar has risen about 3 percent since just before the December 19 FOMC meeting. Over this period, the dollar has appreciated over 4  percent against the yen and the mark while showing little net change against the Canadian dollar.

One factor contributing to  the dollar's strength against the mark and other European currencies over this period appears to  have been market perceptions of a  slowing of  economic activity in  most European countries, leading to heightened expectations of further moves toward monetary easing by European central banks. The same explanation cannot account for the dollar's strength against the yen, since prospects for Japanese growth appear, if  anything, to have increased recently. Some market commentary has focused on  the recent decline in  Japan's external surpluses to explain the yen's weakness. The breakdown of U.S. budget negotiations early this month put temporary downward pressure on  the dollar, but this pressure did not seem to  be  either intense or prolonged.

The most notable feature of  industrial-country financial markets since mid-December has been a  general move by central banks to reduce short-term interest rates. Since the Bundesbank's December 14 announcement of 50 basis point reductions in its discount and Lombard rates and a 23 basis point reduction in its repo rate, the German repo rate has declined an  additional 20  basis points in subsequent repo auctions, to a  current level of 3.55 percent. On  reason for the Bundesbank's easing has been the slow growth of  the targeted M3 monetary aggregate. In the fourth quarter of last year, M3  was only 2.1 percent above its year-earlier level, well below its 4  to 6 percent target range for this period. After a general initial rush to follow the Bundesbank's December 14 interest

Weighted Average Exchange Value of  the Dollar

(Daily ata) d

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Change is  in percentage points.

p. Preliminary

rate  reductions, several  other European central  banks have  continued to move  down money market intervention  rates  in  recent weeks including the Bank of England, which  lowered its  minimum lending rate by 25 basis  points to 6.25 percent on January 18. On  December 19, soon after the FOMC's  announcement  of a 25 basis point  reduction in the federal  funds  rate,  the Bank Of Canada indicated that  it  was reducing its target range for the  overnight rate by  25 basis  points. Another 25 basis point  reduction was  announced on  January 25 lowering the target range  to 5.25 percent to 5.75 percent.

Consistent with this general  move  to monetary easing,  short term market interest rates have declined  since mid-December in all of  the major industrial  countries  except  Japan, where the short-term rate has  edged up slightly. The largest decline has been in  Italy, 70 basis points. The German short-term rate has declined about 45 basis points over the intermeeting period, about 10 basis points more than the  reduction  in the U.S. 3-month rate.

Long-term rates have  also decreased in  nearly all  of the foreign industrial  countries over the past month, with the major exception again being Japan, where the long-term rate has  risen about 30 basis points. The largest  decline in  long-term rates, 70 basis  points, has been  in  Italy,  where apparently  reduced prospects for  early elections may have reduced political uncertainty  somewhat The long-term  rate in Germany has  declined about 10 basis points  on balance, about  the same as the reduction in the comparable U.S. long-term rate over this period.

Since the December FOMC meeting, the Mexican peso has appreciated about 4 percent against the dollar. Over  this period. Mexican short-term interest rates  have declined over 10 percentage points  to below 40 percent, and Mexican  stock prices have risen over 10 percent

Since mid-December, the  gold price has  risen 5 percent, moving above the $400  level. It  is  hard to  explain the  recent  strength of the  gold price  in  terms  of new fundamental  factors. Possibly the lower  interest  rate  atmosphere has  contributed to  the rise.

There has been no U.S. intervention during the intermeeting period.

Developments in Foreign Industrial Countries

Recent data on real  economic  activity in major foreign industrialized  countries indicate that  the pace  of economic  growth has  generally remained  sluggish. While the Japanese  economy has begun to show signs  of a modest pickup,  activity in Germany and France has  slowed further. Only in  Italy has  growth been  fairly strong, although there too,  recent monthly indicators point to  some deceleration.

Inflation pressures  have remained  generally subdued. Prices have fallen further in Japan, while  consumer price  inflation in Canada has continued to decline from its peak in the first  half of last year. In  the United  Kingdom inflation  has  fallen slightly after being pushed up by temporary factors last  summer. Italian inflation  remains  high but  it  is  slowing after reaching a year-onyear  peak of 6 percent  in November.

Financial and economic  uncertainties continue  to  be of  concern in  some countries. In  Germany, the consolidated general budget deficit widened to more than 3-1/2 percent in 1995, raising questions  about Germany's  ability to meet the Maastricht deficit criterion. In Japan, worries  about the health of the banking sector persist,  although the funding premium for Japanese banks in Eurocurrency markets remains at a modest  level. In  Canada, another

referendum on Quebec sovereignty is unlikely before mid-1997 Nonetheless, uncertainty remains about the future of  the Canadian federal structure.

Individual country notes. In Japan, available indicators suggest that the long-stalled economy showed some improvement in  the fourth quarter Industrial production turned up and housing starts and machinery orders were particularly strong in October and

November

Prices have continued to fall The December CPI for the Tokyo area was 0.5 percent below year-earlier levels, while wholesale prices were down 0.3 percent over the same period. The GDP deflator in  the third quarter was 0.2 percent below its level four quarters earlier.

1995

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Percent of manufacturing firms  having a favorable view  of business conditions minus  those  with  an unfavorable outlook.

In  the Bank of  Japan's November survey (Tankan) the index of business sentiment of  major manufacturing firms (the  percentage having a  favorable view of  business conditions minus the percentage

with an  unfavorable outlook) registered -14, slightly less negative than the previous survey taken in  August.

The current account surplus has continued to decline, registering $112 billion (SAAR) in the year through November, down about $17 billion from the same period the previous year. In  the year 1995 the merchandise trade surplus (SAAR) was $107 billion, down almost $14 billion from 1994.

On  January 11 the Diet elected Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) leader Ryutaro Hashimoto as Prime Minister to succeed Tomiichi Murayama of  the Social Democratic Party (SDP). The ruling coalition consists of  the conservative LDP, the left-leaning Sakigake Party, and the formerly socialist SDP. The party leaders have stated that they intend to  keep the three-party coalition intact. The change of Prime Ministers is not expected to cause a  major shift in policies. Many observers are expecting a  new election for the lower house of the Diet around next summer.

In Germany, the "flash" estimate for real GDP shows growth of only 1.9 percent in 1995, considerably less than the 3  percent recorded in 1994. Although the economic expansion held up  in  the first half of last year, at a  rate of  roughly 2-1/2 percent (SAAR), growth stalled in the second half. Reliable data for fourth-quarter real GDP and its components will not be  available until early March, but it now  appears likely based on  the weakness of  industrial production and business confidence that real GDP declined in the final quarter of  1995.

Concern about Germany's ability to  meet the Maastricht deficit criterion emerged with the announcement that the deficit of  the consolidated general government widened from 2.6 percent of  GDP in

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2.  Percent of  firms expecting an  improvement in business conditions during the  next  six  months less  those expecting a deterioration in  conditions.

1994 to  3.6 percent in 1995. While the deficit had been expected to increase somewhat in 1995 when Treuhandanstalt debt was brought onto the books of  the general government, additional fiscal slippage was attributable to  lower-than-expected tax revenues and higher-thanexpected social security expenditures.

Political tensions have been heightened by  a  public controversy in the ruling coalition, with the Federal Democrats (FDP) calling for the removal of  the 7-1/2 percent solidarity surcharge on income beginning of 1997. Chancellor Kohl's Christian Democrats (CDU) and the  Bavarian Christian Socialists (CSU) argue that the surcharge cannot be  removed until 1998 at the earliest. This public debate has increased the likelihood of  the dissolution of  the ruling coalition should the FDP receive little support in three upcoming state elections in late March.

In  France, monthly indicators available for the fourth quarter point to slower growth, even excluding the impact of  the public sector strikes. Industrial production in October-November fell 2.6 percent compared with the third-quarter average, and the December

business survey by  INSEE indicated that output growth remained weak. The survey suggested that business confidence had deteriorated and that inventories were above normal, pointing to a  very weak fourth quarter. The unemployment rate remained unchanged in October after having risen slightly in  September.

Real consumption of  manufactured products (equal to one-third of total consumption) in the fourth quarter was down 1.8 percent from its third-quarter average. While such consumption rebounded in November from its sharp decline in  October (when it registered its largest drop since January 1993), the 24-day public sector strikes that extended through the first half of December reduced consumer spending further. According to INSEE (the  French statistical institute), consumer confidence in  December fell to its lowest level since January 1987.

Consumer prices in  December were 2.1 percent above their yearearlier level. A  modest pick-up in inflation since August has been due largely to a  2  percentage point increase in  the VAT rate to 20.6 percent on  August 1.

The  French merchandise trade balance (SA) registered a  record surplus in November of  $2.9 billion, compared with $1.3 billion in October, on  a  sharp decline in imports. During the first eleven months of 1995. France's cumulative trade surplus registered $20 billion, almost $5  billion greater than  the same period last year, with about equal growth in  both exports and imports.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Percent hange  from previous  ear. Includes  he  increase  the  VAT  on c y t in August 1,  1995

In  the United Kingdom, real GDP rose a  preliminary 1.6 percent (SAAR) in  the fourth quarter. Industrial production was little changed on average in October and November relative to  the thirdquarter level, partly as a  result of  a  sharp contraction in output in  the energy sector in  October due  to unusually warm weather. Manufacturing output continued to be sluggish as inventories were being worked off.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Retail  rices  xcluding  ortgage  interest ments. Percent hange p e m pay c from  previous year.
- 2. Percent hange  from previous  ear. c y

Targeted inflation, measured as the year-on-year change in retail prices excluding mortgage interest payments, remained at 2.9 percent in the fourth quarter. However, as suggested by  the slowing of 12-month producer price inflation during the fourth quarter, upward pressure from earlier depreciation of  the pound and this summer's drought might be  moderating. Inflationary expectations plus an  inflation risk premium which can be interpreted as the yield differential between regular and index-linked gilts, has declined about 1/2 percentage point from its October level to just under 4 percent at the end of December. The pace of  the growth in  average earnings continues to  be  modest.

In Italy, third-quarter data (which are likely to be  revised substantially--as has occurred in  past quarters) indicate that GDP (SAAR) soared as a  result of  a  large inventory build-up and a  rise in fixed investment following a  slight decline in the second quarter. In recent quarters, Italian GDP growth and total domestic demand have been subject to  large fluctuations from changes in inventories. Nonetheless, final domestic demand growth at about 21/2 percent has been relatively strong in  the second and third quarters. Unlike the first two quarters of  1995, net exports made a negative contribution to  growth in  the third quarter, as exports declined and imports increased. Government expenditures continued to fall.

Available monthly indicators point to a  slowdown of  growth in the fourth quarter. Both consumer confidence fell: industrial production declined while the  unemployment rate remained high; and producers likely partially worked off the large stock of  inventories in  the fourth quarter.

<!-- missing-text -->

Inflation in Italy has stabilized but remains high. In December, the consumer price index was 5.8 percent above its yearearlier level, down from 6.0 percent in  November. Wage inflation in October remained relatively moderate at 3.9 percent on a  year-overyear basis, the same as the increase in  September. Wholesale prices in  November were 10.4 percent above their year-earlier level, down from 10.8 percent in  October.

On December 22, the Italian Parliament approved the 1996 budget. It includes a $20 billion deficit reduction package that is split between tax rises and reductions in  public expenditure. The 1996 budget deficit is projected to  be 5.8 percent of GDP, down from 7.4 percent in 1995.

On  January 11, Prime Minister Dini submitted his resignation. Currently, President Scalfaro is  meeting with political party leaders to determine if  an interim bipartisan government can be formed or if  early general elections need to  be  held. Since the end of December, interest rates declined by about 90 basis points probably due to the passage of  the 1996 budget and renewed optimism that Dini will be given a  second mandate.

<!-- missing-text -->

Preliminary indicators suggest that economic activity in Canada remained sluggish in the fourth quarter of 1995. Although employment in December retraced November's decline, employment for the fourth quarter as a  whole was flat, and consequently the unemployment rate was little changed at 9.4 percent. After declining the previous two months, manufacturing shipments and new factory orders increased in November, but the average for October and November remained below the second-quarter average. Retail sales in  October-November also remained below the average level in the second quarter. After rising to near the top of the Bank of Canada's inflation target band of 1 to 3 percent in  mid-1995, consumer price inflation declined to below the mid-point of  the band in December.

Lucien Bouchard resigned from Parliament and will be sworn in as Premier of  Quebec on January 29. He  has said that another referendum on  Quebec sovereignty is  not likely until after a conference between the federal and provincial governments in  April 1997.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  Percent change from  year  earlier.
- 1. Not  seasonally adjusted.
- --Data  not  available on  a monthly basis.

<!-- missing-text -->

Industrial roduction  in  Selected  Industrial  ountries P C

(Monthly  data;  seasonally djusted; atio cale, ndex) a r s i

<!-- missing-text -->

Consumer Price Inflation  n  Selected Industrial ountries i C

(12-month change)

<!-- missing-text -->

Economic Situation in Other Countries

Real GDP growth has been relatively weak in  Latin America, and may be slowing to  more sustainable rates in  Asia. In  Russia, the rate of decline in GDP in 1995 was the smallest since reform began. Latin American countries generally had strong trade performances in 1995 relative to  1994, with the exception of  Brazil; in  Asia, both exports and imports surged, with trade balances improving in China but falling in  Taiwan and  Korea.

Individual country notes. In Mexico, monthly indicators suggest that output may have grown marginally in the fourth quarter. Real GDP increased about 1-1/2 percent in the third quarter on  a seasonally adjusted basis (not an annual rate), but for statistical reasons, that increase was somewhat overstated. The  year-over-year decline in industrial production was about 12 percent in October. The unemployment rate (n.s.a.) fell steadily from September through December, although this decline in  part reflects seasonal factors. Seasonal factors also account for much of  the increase in  consumer price inflation from 2.5 percent in November to 3.3 percent in December. The November decline in  the peso and December increases in  public sector prices also contributed to  inflationary pressures.

In part reflecting the continued weakness of the economy, Mexico's trade performance remains strong. Mexico registered a trade surplus of  $7.4 billion in 1995, compared with an $18.5 billion deficit for the same period in 1994; exports rose 31 percent, while imports fell 9 percent.

In  mid-December, the Bank of  Mexico announced its monetary program for 1996. The Bank anticipates that the monetary base will grow by nearly 29 percent this year compared with expected nominal income growth of  about 24 percent. The projected rise in  the demand for monetary base relative to nominal income is  expected to  reflect a  decline in  inflation from 52 percent (December/December) in 1995

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Percentage  hange  from previous eriod. c p
- 2. Billions  f o U.S. dollars, s.a. n.

to a  targeted 21 percent in 1996. Under the program, net domestic credit creation will be limited to  about 24 percent of  the end-1995 monetary base, so that increases in  money demand beyond that level must be  satisfied through balance-of-payments inflows.

In  Brazil, economic activity may have begun to recover from a decline in the second and third quarters of 1995, when real GDP fell on a  seasonally adjusted basis (though it remained positive on  a year-over-year basis). Inflation remains relatively low.

Brazil recorded a  small trade surplus in the fourth quarter. resulting in  a  cumulative deficit of $3.1 billion for 1995. International reserves stood at $52 billion at the end of  December (liquidity definition), up substantially from its recent low  of  $34 billion in  March 1995.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Percentage  hange from  previous eriod. c p

In  Argentina, real GDP fell an  estimated 3.5 percent in 1995. while inflation remained low: Consumer prices rose 1.7 percent in December from a  year earlier. The unemployment rate fell slightly in  October 1995 to 16.4 percent, down from the record 18.4 percent in May. However, this fall resulted mostly from a  fall in  the participation rate, not an increase in employment. In  the first eleven months of  1995, exports rose 31 percent from the year-earlier period, while imports declined almost 9  percent. However, the monthly trade surplus peaked in  June. Gross international reserves increased slightly in  the last month and stood at $18.5 billion on December 28. This increase in reserves is  due to  a  disbursement from the IMF and the proceeds of  bond placements, as  well as to  a change in the definition of  international reserves, which now include repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements. Of  the $18.5 billion, $2.6 billion are in dollar-denominated Bonex bonds and $1.9 are in  net repurchase agreements. The  monetary base was $13.1 billion, leaving $5.4 billion in  excess reserves.

<!-- missing-text -->

- 3. Billions of U.S. dollars,  .s.a.,current  unt  under n acco Q2 is for he t first half  f o 1995.
- 2. Unemployment  figures  vailable ly a on in May  and  October  of  each  year. The figure  or  1994 is the verage f a of the  two surveys.

Argentina met the fiscal and monetary targets under its IMF program for 1995, which allowed the government to receive about $400 million in December. However, real tax revenues fell nine percent in 1995 from a  year earlier. The government is currently

negotiating with the IMF for a  new one-year $1 billion stand-by program; the current program runs out in  March.

In  Venezuela, real GDP grew an  estimated 2  percent in 1995. However, this performance resulted from the strong performance of the oil sector, which grew 6 percent. Economic activity in  the nonoil sector continued to  decline, contributing to  rising unemployment in 1995. Consumer price inflation picked up in  the fourth quarter, but the 57 percent rise in prices during 1995 was below the 71 percent rise for 1994. Venezuela registered a  merchandise (non-oil) trade deficit of $4.8 billion for the first ten months of 1995, up from a  deficit of $3.1 billion during the year-earlier period, reflecting an 18 percent increase in exports and a  34 percent increase in  imports.

Discussions with the IMF to establish a  program are scheduled to resume in late January. Substantial disagreements remain between the Venezuelan government and the IMF regarding increases in gasoline prices and taxes.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  China, authorities  nounced in  late an December  that eal r GDP rose  10.2 percent in 1995 from a year  earlier. China ran a  trade surplus f o $17 billion  1995, in well  above its surplus f o $5 billion a  year  earlier. Exports  rose 23 percent from a  year earlier, reflecting a  surge in exports in early 1995; in the fourth quarter.

exports were unchanged from the year-earlier period. Import growth, by  contrast, was relatively steady over the year, with growth of 14 percent from a  year earlier. Foreign direct investment into China was $37 billion in  1995, up 10 percent from 1994.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  Taiwan, industrial production declined slightly in the fourth quarter of 1995 from a  year earlier, while consumer prices edged up. The trade surplus declined in 1995 to $8 billion, down from $12 billion in 1994; the  value of  exports rose 20 percent while imports rose 21 percent.

<!-- missing-text -->

In  Korea, growth in economic activity appears to  be slowing to a more sustainable rate, following two years of  extremely rapid growth. Industrial production growth fell markedly in  October and November, and a  substantial deceleration in  imports of  capital goods during the second half of  last year suggests that the investment boom of  1994-95 is tapering off. Export growth, although strong,

also declined somewhat in the last quarter of 1995, in part because of the substantial appreciation of  the Korean won against the yen that occurred since mid-summer. Consumer price inflation has remained stable during the past year, and low compared with past cyclical expansions: Consumer prices were 4.7 percent higher in December 1995 than their year-earlier level.

Both merchandise imports and exports increased by  35 percent during the first eleven months of 1995 from their year-earlier level. Because imports began from a  higher base, this contributed to a  widening of  Korea's current account deficit to $8.5 billion (2 percent of  GDP) during the first eleven months of  the year, up from $4.6 billion over the same period a  year earlier.

<!-- missing-text -->

In Russia, monthly consumer price inflation during December fell to  3  percent, a  post-reform low. Real GDP during 1995 declined by 4  percent from a  year earlier and industrial production was down 3 percent, following double-digit declines during the three previous years. In recent weeks, the ruble has remained relatively stable within its 4550-5150 rubles per dollar band.

Russia has successfully completed two quarterly reviews and eight monthly reviews under its IMF stand-by arrangement, satisfying

(Percent  hange  from  year  earlier c except  where noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

all of  the program's performance criteria and quantitative indicative targets through end-November. The fiscal deficit during October and November was larger than in  previous months, reflecting spending pressures as December's parliamentary election approached, but the cumulative 1995 deficit remained below the program's requirement. The  Russian government and the IMF are in the final stages of negotiating a  three-year Extended Fund Facility, as a successor agreement to the stand-by that expires in  the first quarter of 1996.

The  December parliamentary election resulted in  a significantly more conservative Duma. The Communist Party and its allies won 42 percent of  the seats, almost twice their representation in the old Duma. Reformist parties won  about a quarter of  the  seats, while ultra-nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky's party won 11 percent. The remaining seats were split between small parties and independent candidates. In  mid-January, the Duma elected Communist Gennady Seleznyov as its Chairman, replacing moderate Ivan Rybkin.

On  January 16, First Deputy Prime Minister Chubais resigned, after he  was sharply criticized by President Yeltsin. Chubais, the chief engineer of  Russia's 1995 stabilization program and the 199394 voucher privatization campaign, was the government's leading

economic reformer. Analysts believe that Yeltsin is attempting to strike a  more conservative stance in preparation for June's Presidential election. This said, both Yeltsin and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin have publicly stated that they intend to continue economic reforms.