Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

Strictly nfidential  FR) Class II  OMC Co ( F

March 21, 1996

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

Overview

The economy appears to have ended 1995 on  a  weaker note than we thought at the time of  the January Greenbook, with real GDP barely rising in the fourth quarter. However, the shortfall from our expectation reflected a  much slower pace of  inventory accumulation, and the greater progress in correcting the stock overhang has laid the groundwork for stronger output growth in early 1996. In fact, the latest indicators of activity have been quite upbeat on  the whole, confirming that the economy has maintained appreciable momentum in  the face of  a  series of  adverse natural and manmade shocks. We  now feel more confident that activity will remain on a moderate uptrend over the course of  1996 and 1997. We  expect that real GDP will rise somewhat more than 2  percent this year and slow only minimally in  1997.

The GM strike has created some short-run turbulence; however, we see no existing imbalances or  exogenous forces that point compellingly to a  persistent deviation from essentially trend growth of output over the forecast period. To  be sure, bond yields have soared in  the past few  weeks, but we  still believe that financial conditions overall pose no serious impediment to expansion. The fiscal situation has remained static, with the probability of a multiyear budget compromise seemingly still small; under the circumstances, there appears little prospect of  much further fiscal restraint beyond that imposed by the notching down of  discretionary spending that has already occurred. On the external front, domestic firms are in a  healthy competitive position at prevailing exchange rates, and activity abroad appears to  be  moving in  a  direction conducive to a  continuation of  substantial growth in  U.S. exports.

The projected path of output implies that resource utilization is likely to remain in  the range observed for a  while now--a circumstance that we  think implies a  gradual deterioration in underlying wage and price trends. The risk of  noticeable acceleration in  the near term appears greatest on  the labor cost side, where scattered "shortages" of qualified labor may result in some bidding up of compensation. On  the price side, any pressures from increased labor costs are likely to be damped by  flatness in prices of  imported merchandise. We thus expect core consumer price inflation to rise only marginally over the next two years from the 2.9 percent pace of  the past twelve months. We are not anticipating any sustained impulses to inflation from the food or energy sectors, but the risks are not negligible, given the uncertainties attending supply conditions in  those markets.

Key  Assumptions

In the last Greenbook, we  assumed that the FOMC would hold the federal funds rate target at 5-1/2 percent at least well into 1997. Instead, the Committee cut the rate another 25 basis points. This came as no  shock to the markets, and the action had little immediate effect on  bond prices. Then, mainly in response to  the incoming news on the economy, long-term interest rates moved up sharply.

These developments have led to only relatively modest adjustments to the financial elements of our forecast. We  had expected that bond yields would rise as  markets came to realize that the economy was not as  weak as data early in  the year were read as indicating. In  the event, bond rates increased more rapidly and to a  slightly higher level than projected; although tamer economic data may  have a  constructive effect on bond market psychology in  the near term, we  are not anticipating that bond yields will deviate greatly from the current level over the forecast period; because we  are now

also assuming maintenance of federal funds at or  near the current 5-1/4 percent level, this implies a  somewhat steeper yield curve than before. These conditions suggest, if  anything, a  more favorable environment for banks, and we  expect that any tightening of lending terms and standards will be  quite limited. More generally, credit should remain readily available to  all but the lowest-quality borrowers.

Meanwhile, equity prices have managed to rise further, on  net, in the face of  the bond yield backup and are noticeably higher than we  had anticipated they would be  at this point. Indeed, market valuations may  be somewhat extended relative to "fundamentals," and we  have allowed for a  modest near-term "correction"--to be followed by  a  comparatively subdued uptrend through next year. On average, though, equity prices are higher in  this forecast than in the last-a  plus for aggregate demand.

We  revised our fiscal assumptions in January because efforts to enact a balanced budget plan had foundered. The current forecast is again predicated on  the view that the Congress and the President will remain stalemated on major changes in  mandatory spending programs and taxes. (Although there is talk of possible deals on welfare and Medicaid, any changes enacted are unlikely to have significant effects on  the budget before 1998.) We continue to expect that discretionary spending will be  held down by  lower appropriations or a  series of  continuing resolutions. However, updated estimates of  the amount of  restraint in  legislated appropriations and the current continuing resolution suggest that discretionary outlays will be only $16 billion below the OBRA-93 baseline in fiscal 1996 and fiscal 1997; our previous assumption was a  $20 billion reduction each year. Broadly speaking, much of the notch-down in spending has already been felt through the actions

taken since last fall (including the shutdowns), and little further fiscal contraction is expected in the coming quarters.

A  few other details of the fiscal outlook have been revised. The enactment of  a  farm bill is likely to increase farm subsidies about $2  billion in  both fiscal 1996 and fiscal 1997. Under current law, failure to pass a  farm bill would result in substantially higher subsidies--an alternative that is  undesirable to both the Administration and the Congress. Also, the budget stalemate allowed certain excise taxes to expire at  the beginning of 1996, the largest being the 10 percent tax  on  airline tickets. We feel that in  the absence of  a  broad budget bill, actions to restore these taxes are unlikely in  the near term. This development is expected to reduce receipts by  a  few billion dollars in fiscal 1996 and  by  $5  billion in fiscal 1997. However, technical adjustments to our outlays and receipts forecasts have offset these policy developments in our deficit projection. Under our policy and economic assumptions, we put the unified budget deficit at $160 billion in  fiscal 1996 and $192 billion in  fiscal 1997, about the same as in  the previous Greenbook.

With respect to the external sector, the trade-weighted dollar in  terms of other G-10 currencies has changed little on  net since January, and we  have retained the assumption that the dollar will remain near recent levels. The outlook for foreign economic activity is also little changed, with foreign real GDP (on  a  U.S. export-weighted basis) projected to increase about 3-1/2 percent in each of  the next two years, compared with 2  percent in  1995. The price of crude oil has firmed recently as a  result of the unseasonably cold winter; it  has been buffeted as  well by shifting views on the likelihood that Iraq will resume exporting oil. Last Greenbook, we had expected that the spot price of  WTI would hold

steady in  the first half of this year at  its fourth-quarter average of about $18 per barrel. In  the interim, the spot price has moved above $19 per barrel on average this quarter, and we  now expect it to rise slightly above $20 per barrel early next quarter. The longer-term outlook for oil prices has not been revised, however: We still expect that the spot price will settle at $18.50 by midyear--with a  downside risk associated with possible resumption of oil exports by Iraq.

Recent Developments

Our forecast of real GDP growth in  the first quarter now stands at 1-1/2 percent--about 3/4 percentage point higher than in the January Greenbook. All of  the upward revision is in  final sales, which are now  expected to increase at a  2-1/4 percent rate. The pickup in GDP this quarter would have been stronger if  not for the GM  strike, which we  estimate to slice almost 3/4 percentage point from real growth, assuming that production returns to  normal in  the next few days. 1

<!-- missing-text -->

Of  course, a  great deal of uncertainty attaches to these estimates--probably even more than is usual at  this point in a

quarter, owing to  weather-related distortions of the data. Importantly, the weakness in employment and hours reported for the survey week in  January almost certainly was unrepresentative of  the month as a  whole. However, in light of  other labor market indicators, the strength in  employment reported for February is hard to credit. We  thus anticipate that the next employment report will be weak and are interpreting the labor input picture as consistent with moderate output growth for the quarter.

We project that, among components of final demand, real personal consumption expenditures will bounce back to  a 2-1/2 percent rate of  growth this quarter after a  very modest increase in  the fourth quarter. Retail sales were soft in  January but advanced strongly in  February, paced by  brisk motor vehicle sales.

Outlays for producers' durable equipment (PDE) in real terms are expected to grow at a  4  percent annual rate in the first quarter. Nominal shipments and orders for computing equipment rose in  January and point to a  solid advance in real outlays this quarter--albeit one likely to pale by  comparison with the almost 80 percent annual rate recorded in the fourth quarter. Aircraft shipments should be  up, and available data suggest a  bounce-back of purchases of  motor vehicles by  businesses after a  large decline in the fourth quarter. As  for the remainder of  PDE, we  expect a  small decline in spending.

Housing market activity has strengthened further this quarter in  both the single-family and  multifamily segments. Real residential investment should advance at about a  7  percent rate, in light of  the increase in  housing starts to a  1.47 million unit average in  January and February from a  1.41 million unit average in the  fourth quarter.

Although we  foresee--as in the last Greenbook--a decline in the rate of  inventory investment this quarter that reduces GDP growth 3/4 percentage point, the picture with regard to inventory-sales ratios is much improved. Firms evidently made surprising progress late last year in correcting inventory imbalances, especially outside of  the motor vehicle sector. This quarter, our projected slowdown in  inventory accumulation is confined to  motor vehicles. Some reduction in auto inventories was in  train even before the GM strike; with the strike, dealer stocks will be drawn down sharply. Setting aside vehicles, data for January show substantial jumps in manufacturing and wholesale stocks. Viewing these increases as augmented by  weather-induced delays in  shipments, we anticipate little or  no accumulation, on  net, of non-auto stocks in February and March. Overall, nonfarm inventory stocks are expected to decline slightly in  the first quarter.

One sign that inventory problems are limited is the firmness of manufacturing production. Although the net gain in  output over the first two months of  the year was disproportionately concentrated in the aircraft and computer sectors, the pattern of  developments in other industries was suggestive of  only mild and localized inventory overhangs. It appears that manufacturing output will post a 1-1/4 percent annual rate gain this quarter, despite being reduced by  about 1-1/2 percentage points by  the GM  strike.

The  three CPI reports received since the January Greenbook have revealed no clear change in  inflation trends. The first-quarter increase in the CPI excluding food and energy is  expected to  be 2-3/4 percent--close to the average pace over 1995. The rise in crude oil prices has boosted the energy component of  the CPI, and some further pass-through is likely over the next few  months. We anticipate that energy price increases will push overall CPI

inflation above 3  percent in  the first and second quarters. As noted earlier, though, crude oil prices are expected to subside somewhat by  midyear, paving the  way for slightly lower retail energy prices.

Hourly compensation in the employment cost index accelerated to a  3-1/2 percent annual rate of increase in the final three months of 1995, as health insurance costs jumped. Even so, the increase in private industry compensation for the year ended December was just 2.8 percent--an all-time low  for this series, which began in 1980. Average hourly earnings for production or  nonsupervisory workers bounced around in  January and February but recorded a  net rise of only 0.3 percent--lowering the twelve-month change to a  tad under 3  percent.

The Longer-Run Outlook for the Economy

In broad terms, the current forecast for 1996 and 1997 is essentially the same as the last. Real GDP growth fluctuates around the 2  percent trend of potential output; the unemployment rate holds in  its recent range; and CPI inflation runs at  roughly 3  percent. Compared with the 1-1/4 percent increase in real output last year, the projected pickup in  the pace of activity largely reflects a cessation of restraint from inventories. Indeed, inventories should add slightly to growth in 1996, with the rebuilding of agricultural stocks and the swing in  nonfarm inventory investment each contributing positively.

With regard to the outlook for final sales, the overall thrust of fiscal policy is  expected to be  closer to neutral in  the coming quarters than was the case in  the past several years, and financial conditions appear to be  consistent with output growth near trend. The rise in longer-term interest rates should bring a  halt to the recent surge in residential construction, but the high level of

equity prices should help sustain consumer spending. Real final sales are projected to advance about 2  percent in 1996 and 1997, close to the pace seen last year. However, the predicted composition of  spending involves a  step-up of growth in consumer outlays that offsets a  further cyclical moderation of growth in business fixed investment.

<!-- missing-text -->

Personal consumption expenditure. We  are projecting that the rate of  growth of real consumer outlays will move up from 2  percent in 1995 to 2-1/2 percent in 1996 and 1997--a forecast that has spending advancing a  bit faster than disposable income. In contrast, consumption grew considerably more slowly than income in 1995.

Given the rise in  household net worth associated with the soaring stock market, it  might have been expected that the personal saving rate would have fallen, not risen, last year. Although there is  a  danger of overanalyzing noisy data that have yet to  undergo the usual sequence of annual revisions, some interpretation of  this surprise is necessary in  thinking about the outlook. Several possible drags on consumer demand can  be  readily suggested; (1) The

widely reported anxiety about job security may have prompted greater precautionary saving, although such anxiety was not reflected in any obvious way in  the conventional indexes of consumer sentiment.

- (2) Increased focus on the shaky finances of social security and Medicare/Medicaid may  have raised households' targets for retirement saving. (3)  High returns on stocks may have elevated the expected future yields on saving and encouraged the deferral of consumption.
- (4)  An increasing number of households may have encountered limitations on  their borrowing capacity.

We do  not have a  firm scientific basis for sorting out the importance of the aforementioned hypotheses. Still, the possibility that one or  more of them does capture a  significant force currently at work has led us to project that consumption will grow only a  bit more quickly than disposable income; given the positive surprise in the personal saving rate in  the fourth quarter, this places the  path of the saving rate a  few tenths of  a  percent above that in  the January Greenbook and above the annual average for 1995. Although this seems to  us a  reasonable place to  be, we  think there may be  an upside bias to the risks attending the consumption forecast; we  have assumed only a  small effect of stock market wealth on  consumption, but a  response more in line with some econometric estimates would significantly augment the predicted growth of spending. Moreover, consumers are likely to continue enjoying ready access to credit, despite some signs of greater concern on  the part of lenders in light of  rising delinquencies; and the latest readings on  consumer sentiment have had a  more bullish tone that could foretell near-term strength in demand.

Residential investment. Housing starts are projected to turn down in coming months in response to the backup in  mortgage interest rates. In light of the forecast that income will continue growing

moderately and the expectation that mortgage rates will remain relatively attractive by the standards of  the past few decades, only a  modest decline of starts is  expected. Single-family starts are projected to  fall from a 1.16 million unit rate this quarter to a bit below 1.1 million units in 1997. In the  multifamily market, activity is expected to continue its gradual recovery from the extraordinarily low  levels of  building earlier this decade. Starts should edge up from 300,000 units this year to 310,000 units next year. Credit for construction and permanent financing of income properties reportedly is readily available.

Business fixed investment. The cyclical rebound in  business capital spending probably has run its course. Real growth of business fixed investment is projected to average 3 percent this year and 4  percent next, a  pace just a  little below that in recent quarters; growth averaged near 10 percent in 1993 and 1994. The most important cyclical factor--the output "accelerator," which posits a  relationship between the level of  investment spending and lags of  the growth of output--is expected to restrain investment slightly over the projection period. Notably, declines in  capacity utilization over the past year indicate less need for additions to plant and equipment in the industrial sector.

Real spending for producers' durable equipment is  expected to advance 3 percent in 1996 and 5 percent in 1997. With technology advancing rapidly and computer prices continuing to fall (encouraged in the near term by the recent sharp declines in semiconductor costs), demand for computers is likely to remain robust; we  are projecting annual percentage increases in  the teens for real computer outlays. This rate of growth would be  well below the pace of the past few  years, reflecting our belief that computers are

likely to share in  the general deceleration of  equipment spending-and also reflecting a  sense that computer penetration in the business market has reached the point at  which demand is increasingly determined by  decisions to replace existing machines. (A  caveat: No  matter how  high we  forecast computer sales in  the past few  years, our predictions quite consistently turned out to have been too low!) Business outlays for motor vehicles are expected to  decline a  bit this year, though not as  much as  they did in 1995, and then to  turn up modestly in 1997. Outside of  computers and motor vehicles, investment in  producers' durable equipment is expected to  be  lackluster, with growth averaging only about 1  percent in  real terms--despite an  upturn in  purchases of  aircraft.

In  the nonresidential construction area, a  cyclical slowing of outlays is also expected, reducing growth from 6  percent in 1995 to 3  percent in  1996 and 1  percent in 1997. The recent downturn in contracts and permits might be signaling a  more pronounced softening, but there are a  number of indicators pointing convincingly toward some buoyancy in  building activity: Vacancy rates have been falling and rents firming in a  number of sectors; financing for commercial construction reportedly is in  abundant supply; and although the general view is that existing retail space is excessive, many of  the expanding chains continue to prefer building new  "big  boxes."

Business inventories. A  slowing pace of inventory accumulation restrained real GDP growth 3/4 of a  percentage point over 1995, as firms acted to bring stocks into better alignment with slower growing final sales. As noted earlier, the lower-than-expected rate of inventory accumulation in  the fourth quarter appears to  have brought stocks considerably closer to desired levels, especially outside of  the motor vehicle sector, while the drawdown of  auto

stocks this quarter is likely to result in  a  lean aggregate inventory level in  that sector. After an  expected resumption of stockbuilding in  the second quarter--which adds 1-1/4 percentage points to GDP growth that quarter--we are projecting that inventories will be a  neutral factor for output growth. The ratio of stocks to sales is projected to edge down gradually as efforts to economize on  inventory costs continue.

Government. Assumptions regarding federal purchases are little changed from the previous Greenbook: Real consumption and investment expenditures are expected to decline 2-1/2 percent in 1996 and 1997. The defense and nondefense components are projected to decline at similar rates.

The fiscal position of  state and local governments appears to be relatively healthy in  the aggregate. Although pressure to cut taxes may  cause effective tax  rates to edge down over the next two years, these governmental entities should be  able to increase real purchases 2-1/2 percent in 1996 and 1997--close to the average so far in the current expansion--without causing budgetary strains. Of course, reforms in  welfare or  Medicaid, which would alter patterns of grants to states considerably, could have effects on  finances within the sector; but at  the moment, it  is  hard to see changes being enacted that would have significant macro consequences within the forecast period.

Net exports. Although real exports are expected to grow fairly rapidly, the high propensity to import in conjunction with the projected step-up in GDP growth suggests that import growth will be fast enough to cause some deterioration of  our real net export balance. The trade sector is expected to directly reduce real GDP growth about 1/4 percentage point in 1996 and somewhat less in

1997.2 (See the International Developments section for a  more complete discussion.)

Labor markets. The overall contour of the labor projection has productivity advancing close to  its trend rate of 1.0 percent and the unemployment rate holding at around 5.6 percent. After March, monthly gains in  payroll employment should average about 100,000. Last year, although real GDP growth fell short of  potential, the unemployment rate was little changed as  the participation rate fell. We expect the participation rate to retrace that decline this year-indeed, in  January-February, it rose close to our estimate of its "equilibrium" level--thus enabling real GDP growth to be  a  bit above trend without putting downward pressure on  the unemployment rate. Also, the expected rebound of  farm output adds a  small positive wedge this year between growth rates of GDP and labor input.

Wages and prices. Perhaps the biggest news in data about labor costs and prices received since the January Greenbook was the sharp increase in  health insurance expenses contained in  the employment cost index (ECI) for the three months ending in December. Overall benefit costs jumped to a  5-1/2 percent annual rate of  increase from an average annual rate of growth of 1-1/2 percent in  the first three quarters of 1995. We  had been expecting that benefit costs would accelerate from the very low rates of growth that prevailed earlier in 1995, but the increment was well above our forecast. Given the variability of the quarterly numbers (and  the possibility that the

delay in  the survey, owing to the government shutdowns, might have distorted the results), we  have reacted cautiously to the surprise and raised our projection of the growth rate of ECI benefits less than 1/2 percentage point. Overall, we expect that the tightness of the labor markets--and some pickup in consumer price inflation (see below)--will be reflected in a  modest elevation of  compensation gains. The  ECI index for compensation of private industry workers is expected to accelerate from growth of  2.8 percent in 1995 to 3.0 percent in 1996 and 3.3 percent in 1997.

<!-- missing-text -->

On the view that firms' profit margins are ample, only part of the upward revision in  the projection for labor costs has been passed through to prices. The core CPI is expected to  increase 2.9 percent in 1996 and 3.1 percent in  1997, up a  tenth of  a  point each year compared with the January Greenbook. Core inflation in 1996 is expected to be  held down by  more-favorable import prices and the pass-through of  recent declines in prices of raw  materials and intermediate goods.

The overall CPI is projected to increase about 3  percent in both 1996 and 1997, up somewhat from the pace of  the past couple of years. Because of  the increases that have occurred in  grain and oilseed prices, we are anticipating that--even on the assumption of

normal crop yields--retail food prices will move up a  little faster than they have in recent years, at a  pace about in line with core inflation. Apart from the uncertainties associated with the crop outlook, a  wild card in the food price projection is the potential volatility of  meat prices that could be set off by  producers' decisions about herd sizes and slaughter rates. Although changes in agricultural technology may  have altered the timing and dimension of livestock supply adjustments from what has been observed in the past, we suspect that the squeeze on  margins will prompt producers to trim their herds this year after several years of  buildup. Indeed, if  the anticipated selloff of  herds turns out to  be  heavy, increases in  meat prices this year could be  smaller than we  are forecasting--but with the twist that price increases farther down the road might then turn out to  be larger than we currently are predicting.

As noted previously, developments in  the oil market have already left their mark on the CPI and will tend to boost the CPI for a  few  more months. Although we  expect retail energy prices to flatten out in the second half of  the year, the less-favorable Q4/Q4 change in  these prices is the  biggest factor in  our forecast of an acceleration of the total CPI in 1996. In 1997, the assumed stability of  the price of crude oil makes retail energy prices a slight favorable factor in  the overall consumer inflation outlook.

Alternative Simulations

We  have run two  model simulations in  which the funds rate is symmetrically raised or lowered relative to  the assumption in the Greenbook. Deviations from baseline start at 50  basis points in the second quarter of this year and increase to 100 basis points in  the third quarter and beyond. In  the lower-rate scenario, real GDP growth is 1/4 percentage point higher this year and 3/4 percentage

point higher in 1997. The unemployment rate is reduced 0.3 percentage point by the end of 1997, and core CPI inflation is 0.3 percentage point higher than in the baseline forecast. The effects of  the tighter policy scenario are symmetric.

<!-- missing-text -->

CONFIDENTIAL

&lt;FR&gt;

CLASS  II  FOMC

March 21

1996

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

March 21, 1996

<!-- missing-text -->

* Published

Components may not  sum to  total  ue  to  rounding. d

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1.  OMB's March 1996 baseline deficit estimates (assuming discretionary spending at  OBRA93 caps, and an  extension of the expired trust fund excise taxes) are $161 billion in  FY96 and $144 billion in FY97. CBO's December 1995 baseline deficit estimates (including the fiscal dividend from assumed enactment of congressional budget program) are $172 billion in  PY96 and  $182 billion in  FY97 Budget receipts, outlays, and  surplus/deficit include corresponding Social Security (OASDI) categories. The OASDI surplus is excluded from the on-budget deficit and  shown separately as off-budget, as classified under current law. The Postal Service deficit is included in  off-budget outlays beginning in  FY90
- 2 OMB's March 1996 baseline deficit estimates (assuming discretionary spending at  OBRA93 caps, and  an  extension of the expired trust fund excise taxes), excluding deposit insurance spending, are  $169 billion in FY96 and  $148 billion in  FY97. CBO's December 1995 baseline deficit estimates (including the fiscal dividend from assumed enactment of congressional budget program), excluding deposit insurance spending, are $180 billion in FY96 and $186 billion in  FY97.
- 3.  Other means of financing are checks issued less checks paid, accrued items, and  changes in other financial assets and  liabilities.
- 4.  HEB is the  NIPA current and  capital account surplus in  current dollars, with cyclically sensitive receipts and  outlays adjusted to the level of  potential output generated by 1.8 percent real growth and  an  associated unemployment rate of 6 percent. Quarterly figures for change in HEB and FI are  not at  annual rates. Change in  HEB, as  a  percent of nominal potential GDP, is reversed in sign. FI is the  weighted difference of  discretionary changes in  federal spending and taxes (in  chained 1992 dollars), scaled by real federal consumption plus investment. For change in  HEB and  FI, negative values indicate restraint.

Summary

The announcement of  an  easing in  monetary policy after the January FOMC meeting led to further declines in short-term interest rates, and market participants seemed to  expect additional reductions in  the funds rate by  early summer. In recent weeks, however, interest rates have risen sharply as incoming information dashed the notion that the economy was lapsing into a  period of seriously subpar performance and the prospects for a  broad fiscal agreement continued to  fade. Three-month bill rates are up 2  basis points since late January, and the short-term rate curve indicates that no policy easing is expected. In  the coupon sector, interest rates on  Treasury notes and bonds have climbed 55 to 65 basis points, on net, despite some decline in recent days. The rise in rates on private market bonds has about matched that on  Treasuries, keeping quality spreads historically low.

Equity prices have run counter to bond prices, with  most major stock indexes advancing 3  percent to 5-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period in  active and volatile trading. On  Friday, March 8,  after the unexpectedly strong employment report was released, the broader indexes fell an extraordinary 3  percent; there were no signs of panic, however, and the market turned up nicely in the following week.

The resilience of  equity prices in  the face of  rising bond yields has been all the  more surprising given that over the past several weeks securities analysts have, if  anything, revised down their estimates of  corporate earnings for 1996. Price-to-earnings ratios, whether measured with backward-looking earnings or analysts' expectations of  future profits, now  appear somewhat elevated compared with readings over the past year or  two. However, these

and other measures of relative returns on equities have not been particularly helpful in the past in foreshadowing significant declines in stock prices--that is, apparent "overvaluations" have often persisted until a major shock, often a  substantial tightening of  monetary policy, triggered a  correction.

The broad monetary aggregates have grown swiftly of  late. M2 expanded at a  5-1/4 percent annual rate in February following a 4-3/4 percent rise in January; M3 advanced at a  10 percent pace last month, up from a  7-1/4 percent pace in  January. Both aggregates have gotten a  lift from money market mutual funds, which became more attractive as their returns lagged the drop in short-term market yields. Data for early March point to an acceleration of  M2 and continued rapid growth of  M3, pushing both aggregates further above their respective annual ranges.

In contrast, bank credit expansion slowed to a  3-1/2 percent rate in February, as weaker loan growth more than offset a  rise in securities purchases. Consumer loans were about flat, and real estate lending slowed. Demand by investors for paper backed by consumer receivables, home equity loans, and fixed-rate mortgages has remained strong, inducing banks to securitize these types of credits. However, even after adjusting for securitizations, consumer loans at  banks expanded at just over half the average rate recorded in  the past year. Business loans at banks rose at a 6  percent rate last month, down from January but about the same pace registered in  late 1995. Moderate growth of  business loans does not appear to reflect supply constraints: Banks reportedly have continued to compete aggressively for commercial and industrial loans, and in February the average spread over the federal funds rate was the narrowest in a  decade.

Gross public offerings of  corporate bonds were strong until mid-February, when the backup in  interest rates prompted postponements or outright cancellations. Even so, bond issuance for nonfinancial firms last month was up from  January and about matched the elevated pace in  the fourth quarter of 1995. Financing for corporate restructuring has been an important factor boosting issuance of  bonds and adding to  the growth of  nonfinancial commercial paper.

Gross equity issuance also increased in  February and remained high in early March. The strong stock market has provided a particularly favorable environment for initial public offerings by young firms; IPOs have accounted for about half the nonfinancial equity issued since late 1995. Nonetheless, share retirements resulting from mergers and acquisitions and from share repurchases continued to exceed new  issues by  a substantial margin.

Available data for the household sector suggest that borrowing has been well maintained in recent months. Growth of  total consumer credit in  January was about unchanged from the pace in the second half of 1995, although lending at banks implies there was some slowing in February. Mortgage borrowing appears to have risen during the current quarter; however, loan applications--especially those for refinancing rather than home purchase--declined sharply in response to  the recent backup in rates. The latest readings on consumer and  mortgage loan delinquencies, covering the closing months of 1995, show some further deterioration, but there are no signs that this worsening in loan quality has resulted in  major shifts in overall credit demand or  supply.

State and local governments, like corporations, had been taking advantage of  lower interest rates by refinancing higher-cost debt, and gross issuance of  tax-exempt bonds dropped sharply in

mid-February when potential interest savings evaporated. Overall, state and local debt continues to contract owing to  the large volume of  pre-refunded securities now  being retired as call dates arrive.

The enactment of legislation temporarily resolving the debt-ceiling impasse allows the Treasury to meet its financing needs through March 29, and borrowing is expected to total nearly $60 billion in the first quarter.

Outlook

The staff's economic projection assumes no change in  the federal funds rate over the forecast period. Bond yields are expected to  change little, possibly retracing a  touch more of their recent run-up in yields in  coming weeks. Although moderate economic growth and inflation should be  compatible with further gains in corporate profits, current share valuations seem optimistic, and we expect that the stock market will face difficulty in  extending its uptrend.

The recent easings of  monetary policy, which have narrowed the spread of short-term market interest rates over the deposit interest rates offered to households, are likely to continue to boost M2 for a  while longer; growth in 1996 is expected to be  somewhat above its annual growth range. As in 1995, M2 velocity seems likely to post a small decline. The strong expansion of  M3 in 1995 should be sustained this year, although bank credit growth is likely to remain moderate. Banks are anticipated to put greater emphasis on  deposit funding, in  part owing to  the absence of  insurance premiums. With market interest rates assumed stable in 1997, the rates of  expansion of the broad monetary aggregates are projected to ease off slightly and velocity to  flatten out.

Growth of domestic nonfinancial debt, which was 5-1/2 percent in 1995, is projected to  be 5 percent in 1996 and 4-3/4 percent in

1997. The reduction reflects a  slowing of  growth in  credit to households and businesses. A  pickup in federal debt growth, owing to a  rise in  the deficit, will somewhat offset the moderation in nonfederal debt.

Growth of  business debt is projected to slow to  4-1/2 percent next year and 4-1/4 percent in 1997, compared with 6-1/2 percent last year. We  are not anticipating a  significant slackening in  the pace of  equity share retirements, but  borrowing demands are likely to  be less robust as a  consequence of  reduced inventory accumulation and slower growth of  business fixed investment.

Although the rise in  bond yields has deterred issuance in recent weeks, we expect that borrowers will return as  market conditions stabilize. Meanwhile, banks most likely will remain eager lenders over the period ahead as nothing in the outlook suggests the emergence of severe credit quality problems that would prompt a  significant tightening of  standards or terms for business borrowers. Banks are likely to remain highly profitable, and the additional capital will tend to encourage lending.

In  the household sector, home mortgage debt growth is expected to remain close to its current levels, in  line with our expectations of a  moderate rise in  nominal outlays for residential construction. Growth of  consumer credit is projected to slow. in part because repayment volumes will be rising in reflection of  the rapid rise of borrowing in  the past few years; the subdued growth of outlays for big  ticket items points to  relatively modest increases in extensions. Already high debt levels may limit the potential for borrowers to qualify for additional credit, and rising delinquency rates are likely to  make banks and other lenders more cautious; however, we  think this will prove to be a  limited shift in availability, affecting mainly a  small segment of  primarily lower

income households. Total household debt is projected to rise about 6-3/4 percent in 1996 and 6  percent in 1997 down from the 8  percent rate of 1995 but still faster than the projected rise in  nominal personal income.

State and local debt outstanding is expected to continue to contract in 1996 and 1997 but at a  slower pace than in 1994 and 1995. The volume of scheduled retirements of  pre-refunded bonds is estimated to  be shrinking. Nonetheless, retirement volume remains sizable and should more than offset an expected increase in  issuance of  tax-exempt securities to fund a  rise in governmental construction.

CHANGE IN DEBT OF THE  DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL SECTORS ' (Percent)

<!-- missing-text -->

basis,  otal bt  rows  5.5 ercent  995, .9 ercent  n  1996, nd .7 ercent  n 997. ederal

t

de

g

p

in1

4

p

i

a

4

p

i

1

F

debt ises 4 ercent  n  1995, .5  ercent   1996, nd

r

4. p

4

p

in

a

5.3

percent  n  1997. onfederal bt

i

N

de

5. p increases  9 ercent  n  1995, .0 ercent  n  1996, nd .5 ercent

i

5

p

i

a

4

p

in

1997.

2.6.3  FOF

Confidential  Class FR II March 21, 1996

FLOW OF  FUNDS PROJECTIONS: HIGHLIGHTS 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. Data  after 1995:q4 are taff  ojections. s pr
- 2.  For orporations: ess f  apital  penditures  er  U.S. nternalfunds. c Exc o c ex ov i
- 3.  Average ebt  evels  he eriod  computed s  the verage  f  eriod-end bt ositions) ided  nominal DP. d l int p ( a a o p de p div by G
- 4. NIPA surplus  ess  etirementfunds s onsumption  ffixed pital. l r plu c o ca
- 5.  Excludes  overnment-insured tgage ool ecurities. g mor p s
- 2.6,4 FOF

Recent Developments

The weighted-average foreign exchange value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies depreciated 1-1/4 percent, on balance, since the January FOMC. The dollar weakened 3/4 percent against the German mark and most other ERM currencies, 1-3/4 percent against sterling, and about 1/4 percent in terms of the yen. The Mexican peso declined 1-1/4 percent against the dollar.

During the first half of the intermeeting period, the dollar moved down as market participants came to  believe that further monetary easing in Germany, and thus in  most other European countries, was unlikely in the near term. Data showing rapid growth in German M3 and moves by  Bundesbank officials to hold their repo rate fixed at 3.30 percent contributed to expectations of no further cuts in official rates soon. Evidence that Japanese economic activity was recovering enhanced prospects for monetary tightening sometime soon in  Japan and contributed to the downward pressure on the dollar. In late February, signs that the U.S. economy was generally stronger than had been expected and that economic developments abroad were less positive than they had seemed fed a rebound in  the dollar. In addition, the dollar may have been supported by  very heavy intervention purchases by  the Bank of Japan in February.

Long-term interest rates rose over the intermeeting period in most of the major foreign industrial countries, but less than the U.S. ten-year Treasury rate increased. Exceptions were Japan and Switzerland, where long-term rates were about unchanged on balance. The rise in rates in continental Europe is somewhat surprising in light of indicators suggesting that economic activity remains sluggish. On average, short-term interest rates abroad are little

changed. Rates moved  down  in  France,  the  United Kingdom,  Canada, and  Sweden in  response to  reductions  in official  lending rates.

The Desk did  not intervene  in foreign exchange  markets  over the  intermeeting period.

Economic  growth  remained  subdued  in  most major  foreign industrial countries  toward the  end  of  last year with the  exception of  Japan;  recent  indicators  suggest  divergent performance  this quarter. Real  GDP  declined during  the  fourth  quarter in Germany  and France,  as  domestic  demand  fell  in both countries. In  Germany, industrial production recovered  somewhat in  January, but  orders fell. Unemployment  rose  further  through February. In France,  a bounceback in  economic  activity from the fourth-quarter strikes  can be  seen in  the  rebound in  January  of  consumption  of manufactured products. In  the  United Kingdom,  real GDP  rose moderately  in  the final  quarter of  last year. Although overall  industrial  production fell  in  January, manufacturing output increased. The  unemployment rate  edged  down through February from  its  end-1995  level.

In  contrast,  indicators  of  economic  activity in  Japan  are generally positive. Real  GDP  grew briskly  in  the  fourth  quarter, led by  stronger public  and private  investment. After rising  in  the fourth  quarter, manufacturing orders  and housing  starts  increased further in January. The Bank of  Japan's  February survey  (Tankan) was  slightly less  negative  than the  previous  November  survey. In Canada,  real  GDP  rose  slightly  during the  fourth  quarter. More recent  indicators  suggest  a pickup  in  growth  as  manufacturing orders and  shipments and  retail  sales  rose  in  January;  employment  growth was buoyant  from November through February.

Inflation in the major  foreign industrial  countries  remains low. Prices  have  declined further  in  Japan. In  Germany, France,

and Canada, the most recent increases in consumer prices from a  year earlier have been 2  percent or less whereas in the United Kingdom inflation has been under 3 percent. Italian inflation remains considerably higher than that in the other countries, but has improved recently.

The U.S. nominal trade balance in goods and services was about the same in December as in November. Both exports and imports rose 1  percent from November to December. For the fourth quarter, the deficit narrowed substantially. Exports rose 2.2 percent from the third quarter while imports declined 0.5 percent. The current account deficit also narrowed sharply in  the fourth quarter. In addition to the lower trade deficit, a reduced deficit on net investment income contributed to the improvement in the current account.

After remaining unchanged in the fourth quarter of last year, the average price of U.S. exports rose sharply in January, as prices of agricultural exports continued an upward trend that began early last year and prices of  nonagricultural exports stopped falling. Prices of non-oil imports declined somewhat in  January, as they had in the fourth quarter. The price of imported oil rose sharply in December and January, reflecting the colder-than-normal weather in the northern hemisphere and political uncertainties in Saudi Arabia. The spot price of  WTI fell back more than $2 per barrel during January on news that Iraq would proceed to negotiate with the United Nations for a limited sale of oil. Since the end of  January, spot oil prices have become more volatile as markets await the outcome of those talks. Unusually low inventories have contributed to the volatility in prices as refiners seek to avoid restocking ahead of a possible decline in prices. The price of  spot WTI has risen, on balance, in February and March and is currently $20.95 per barrel,

with the July futures contract for WTI trading at $18.80 per barrel. Outlook

The staff projects that total foreign real GDP growth (weighted by U.S. bilateral exports) will average about 3-1/2 percent this year and next, up slightly from the final quarter of last year and faster than the growth projected for U.S. real output, The dollar is expected to remain near current levels over the forecast period. With imports more responsive to U.S. income growth than are exports to foreign income growth, real imports are projected to grow a  bit faster than real exports this year and at about the same rate as exports next year. Because the level of imports is larger than that of exports, this outlook results in a decline in real net exports (as measured in chained 1992 dollars). After being essentially neutral during 1995, real net exports are expected to make a  small negative contribution to real GDP growth during 1996-1997.

The dollar. We project that the foreign exchange value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies will remain little changed from its recent levels throughout the forecast period. This is the same level projected in  the previous Greenbook. We expect that the CPI-adjusted value of  the dollar in terms of  the currencies of key  developing countries will depreciate at a  moderate rate both this year and next. In particular, from current levels the Mexican peso is expected to appreciate in real terms over the forecast period, as its nominal value against the dollar depreciates more slowly than the rate by  which Mexican inflation exceeds U.S. inflation.

Foreign G-7 countries. The staff projects that real GDP growth in the foreign G-7 countries (weighted by  bilateral U.S. export shares) will strengthen from an annual rate of 1  percent

during the final quarter of 1995 to about 2-1/2 percent during 1996 and 1997. The rebound in activity is expected to be widespread.

In Japan, recovery is already under way, owing to past monetary easing and fiscal stimulus, and is expected to continue at about a  2-1/2 percent rate this year and next.

In  Germany, activity is expected to remain quite weak during the first half of this year but then to grow at an annual rate of about 2-1/4 percent during the remainder of the forecast period. Past declines in short-term interest rates and a small projected further decline, along with depreciation of the mark during the second half of 1995 and early 1996, should strengthen German economic activity.

In France, real output growth is forecast to rebound to a 2 percent annual rate during the first half of this year as the disruptive effects of  public sector strikes in November and December are reversed. Output growth is projected to strengthen further, to 2-1/2 percent late this year and during 1997, as domestic demand responds to lower interest rates.

In the United Kingdom, real output growth remained moderate during 1995 and is expected to continue this year at about the 2 percent annual rate observed in the fourth quarter before strengthening slightly next year.

Canadian real GDP growth is projected to rise from less than 1 percent during the fourth quarter of last year to about 2-1/2 percent at an annual rate over the forecast period. Improved economic performance in the United States and the monetary easing that began last year are expected to contribute to the stronger pace of expansion.

The staff outlook for inflation in the foreign G-7 countries has been lowered slightly. When weighted by  bilateral U.S. import

shares, consumer price inflation is projected to rise only very slightly, from 1  percent in 1995 to 1-1/4 percent in 1996 and 1997.

The staff forecast incorporates the assumption that short-term interest rates abroad will move down slightly further, on average, through mid-1996 before rising over the subsequent six quarters. German short-term market interest rates are assumed to  move down with some further easing of official rates in the near term before rising as the pace of economic expansion increases later in the forecast period. Japanese short-term market rates are assumed to be near their trough and to rise next year as the economy strengthens. On average, long-term interest rates abroad are expected to retrace much of their intermeeting rise in the near term, with the assumed easing of short-term rates in  Europe. Long-term rates are assumed to remain fairly stable through the rest of 1996 before moving back up a  bit by  the end of 1997.

Other countries. The real GDP of  major developing-country trading partners of the United States (weighted by U.S. nonagricultural export shares) is projected to increase about 5-1/2 percent per year during 1996-97, compared with an estimated 3-1/2 percent growth during 1995 (on a  Q4/Q4 basis). The pickup in growth in 1996-97 largely reflects recovery in  Mexico.

Real GDP in Mexico fell 6.6 percent in 1995, substantially less than was expected. The marked expansion of activity in the fourth quarter, following a  slight expansion in the third quarter, is consistent with our previous forecast that Mexico had passed its recession trough and has begun to recover. We project that real GDP in  Mexico will grow at an average rate of about 5  percent per year during 1996-97, recovering to its pre-recession level by  mid-1997.

Our major trading partners in Asia are expected to continue to experience strong growth over the forecast period, although growth is projected to decline from an average rate of about 7-1/2 percent

in 1995 to 7 percent in 1996-97. Recent trade data seem consistent with our projection that the yen's depreciation during the second half of last year will lead to a  considerable deceleration in the exports of these countries.

U.S. real exports and imports of goods and services. The growth of total real exports was boosted during the fourth quarter of last year by extremely rapid increases in the quantities of computer and semiconductor exports.1 We project that the rates of growth of those categories of exports will remain robust but will fall back from those recorded last year. The quantities of other goods exports (excluding agricultural products) should grow moderately, at an average annual rate of 3  percent, during 1996-97. largely reflecting the expected recovery in total foreign real output growth. Prices of U.S. exports relative to foreign prices are projected to rise slightly over the forecast period and, on balance, make a small negative contribution to export growth during 1997.

Total real imports of goods and services, which were essentially flat during the second half of last year, are projected to expand a  bit more rapidly than total exports over the forecast period. The growth in the quantities of imported computers and semiconductors is expected to drop back toward more-normal, but still quite elevated, rates. Growth of other non-oil goods imports is projected to average about 4-1/2 percent this year and next, reflecting the expected improvement in  U.S. real output growth and a small boost beginning late this year as domestic prices rise relative to import prices. We expect the quantity of oil imports to rise this quarter and next, and to continue to expand on  balance

during the remainder of the forecast period, as consumption rises and U.S. production declines.

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: NIPA  basis, chained (1992) dollars.

- 1. Merchandise exports excluding agriculture, computers and semiconductors.
- 2. Merchandise imports excluding oil, computers, and  semiconductors.

Oil prices, Given recent increases in spot oil prices, the projected prices of imported oil for the first and second quarters have been revised up $0.89 and $1.80 per barrel, to $16.80 and $17.33 per barrel respectively. The staff forecast continues to assume that Iraq will not resume selling oil on world markets until 1997. Our projections for WTI spot price and the oil import unit value in 1997 are $18.50 and $16.00 per barrel respectively, unchanged from the January Greenbook. If Iraq reaches an agreement to sell a  limited amount of oil under the supervision of  the United Nations starting this year, the additional 700 thousand to 800 thousand barrels of oil per day on the world oil market would likely depress prices by  $3-$4 per barrel. (See below for a  discussion of

the implications of such a  change in the oil price on the staff forecast.)

Prices of  non-oil imports and exports. Prices of  non-oil imports (including computers and semiconductors) are expected to move up slightly this year and next as foreign inflation remains low and the dollar is stable. Prices of  nonagricultural exports (including computers and semiconductors) are projected to decelerate through the middle of  this year and then to rise moderately during the second half of  this year and somewhat faster next year.

<!-- missing-text -->

Nominal trade and current account balances. The nominal trade deficit on goods and services is projected to widen only slightly over the forecast period from its unusually low value in the fourth quarter of last year to more than $90 billion at an annual rate at the end of 1997. The deficit on net investment income is projected to increase somewhat over the forecast period. The current account deficit is projected to average about $145 billion in both 1996 and 1997, just under 2  percent of  GDP.

Alternative oil-price scenario. We estimate that if Iraq were to reach agreement with the United Nations to sell a  limited amount of oil this year, with no offset in production by  other OPEC members, spot oil prices would likely fall on world markets by  $3  to $4 per barrel. In order to judge the impact of such a  change on the U.S. economy, we used the staff's econometric models to simulate a

decline in the price of oil of  $3.50 starting in the second quarter of this year; the price remains at that lower level through the second quarter of  next year and then gradually returns to baseline. The baseline forecast incorporates the assumption that Iraq resumes exporting oil in 1997. In the simulation, it is assumed that the U.S. short-term interest rate remains on its baseline path. Under this monetary policy assumption, lower inflation results in  higher real short-term interest rates. Consumers benefit from higher real disposable income with the lower oil price, and GDP initially rises relative to baseline. By  the second year, the impact of higher real short-term interest rates offsets the stronger consumption and depresses real GDP.

<!-- missing-text -->

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL FR

CLASS II FOMC

REAL GDP  AND  CONSUMER PRICES, SELECTED COUNTRIES, 1994-97 (Percent; quarterly change at  an annual rate except as  noted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. Annual values are  measured from Q4 to  Q4.

- 1.  Not seasonally adjusted.
- 2. CPI excluding mortgage interest payments; the targeted mortgage interest payments was shown. Previously the CPI including inflation rate.

Strictly Confidential (FR)  Class II-FOMC

<!-- missing-text -->

Strictly Confidential (FR) Class II-FOMC

OUTLOOK FOR U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS IN  GOODS, SERVICES, AND  THE CURRENT ACCOUNT (Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates)

<!-- missing-text -->