Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS III - FOMC

May 16, 1997

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By  the Staff Board of  Governors of  the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Consumer Sentiment

According to  the preliminary report, the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment surged in early May, reaching an all-time high of 104.6. The index of  expected conditions rose 6.1 points, as households reported decidedly more favorable expectations of their personal financial situations and of  business conditions in  the next twelve months. The index of current conditions slipped a  bit in early May  but remained at a  very high level.

Among questions not included in  the overall index, results were also upbeat. The index of car buying conditions advanced strongly, reaching the highest level since April 1994. The index of  house buying conditions also posted a  solid gain in early May. In  their attitudes towards buying cars and homes, consumers' concerns about rising interest rates diminished in  May, after increasing appreciably in  April. The expected change in  unemployment over the next year declined sharply, continuing a  broad downward trend that began in  early 1996.

The mean value of expected inflation over the coming year rose 0.1 percentage point to 3.8 percent, while the median was unchanged at 3.0 percent. Both the mean and median values of expected inflation over the next five to ten years moved up 0.2 percentage point, to 3.8 and 3.1 percent respectively.

Housing Starts

Total private housing starts rose 2.6 percent in  April to 1.47 million units because of a  jump in construction of  multifamily housing units. Revisions boosted the starts estimates for February and March by  32,000 units and 10,000 units, respectively. Estimates of permit issuance were revised back to January 1995, but most of the changes were negligible.

The rise in starts at  the national level almost entirely reflected an 11-1/4 percent surge in  the South to one of the highest levels on record for that region. Starts in the Midwest edged up 0.7 percent. Starts were off about 7  percent in  both the Northeast and the West.

Single-family starts were about unchanged in  April at 1.12 million units, but permits for single-family construction rose nearly 3  percent. The level of  permit issuance suggests that

single family construction may be  marginally higher than is indicated by  the level of starts.

Multifamily starts jumped to 355,000 units an increase of nearly 11  percent However permits for multifamily units dropped in  April following a  large rise in  March, suggesting that the bulge in  multifamily starts likely is transitory

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF  CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not  seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and  buying conditions are the percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the  percent reporting 'bad  times' (or  'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to fall, plus 100.

Private ousing Activity H

(Millions of units; seasonally  adjusted  annual rate)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note. p Preliminary.  r  Revised.  n.a.  Not  available.

Private Housing  Starts

(Seasonally djusted  annual rate) a

<!-- missing-text -->

THE FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Selected Interest Rates

Attached are the charts on selected interest rates usually printed on the back of  the green sheet at the beginning of the Greenbook Part 2  financial section

Selected Interest Rates

5..

<!-- missing-text -->

Long-Term

<!-- missing-text -->

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations' M

e

(Percent  xcept s  noted)

a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 1. One-day  quotes xcept s  noted. e a
- 2.  Average  for wo-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest   date hown.  Last bservation   the verage o  date or aintenance eriod nding  May t m p c o s o is a t f m p e 21,1997.
- 3.  Secondary  market.
- 4.  Bid  rates  or urodollar  eposits  t  11 a.m. ondon time. f E d a L
- 5.  Most  recent  bservation sed  on  one-day  Thursday  quote nd  futures  arket ndex  changes. o ba a m i
- 6.  Merrill  ynch  Master  II igh-yield  ond  index omposite. L h b c
- 7.  Quotes  for eek ending  Friday revious  o  date hown. w p t s
- *  Figures  ited  re s  of he lose n  March 24,  1997. c a a t c o