Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CLASS III - FOMC

June 28, 1996

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By the Staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Real GDP 1996:Q1 (final)

According to BEA's final estimate, real GDP increased 2.2 percent at an annual rate in  the first quarter of 1996, little changed from the preliminary estimate of 2.3 percent. A large drawdown of  motor vehicle inventories, associated in  part with the shutdown at General Motors, held down GDP growth about a  percentage point. By contrast, final sales grew at a  3.3 percent annual rate in the first quarter, as both consumption and investment posted sizable increases. However, net exports fell $18 billion in  the first quarter (as  measured in chained 1992 dollars), about offsetting the large fourth-quarter increase.

As we expected, the final figure for  nonfarm inventory accumulation was slightly higher in real terms than the preliminary estimate, and final sales were a  bit lower. The most notable downward revisions were those to Federal government purchases and exports of goods and services; revisions to other categories were small. The preliminary estimate of Federal purchases had been surprisingly large, given budget developments, and the downward revision makes the first-quarter increase more plausible.

Today's report included revised first-quarter corporate profits. Profits for corporations other than Federal Reserve Banks (with inventory valuation adjustment and capital consumption adjustments) are estimated to  have risen another $33.2 billion last quarter, an upward revision of $9.2 billion from the preliminary estimate. The revision occurred entirely in  profits from foreign sources, as domestic profits were unchanged. As a  share of  GNP, non-Federal Reserve corporate profits were 8.5 percent, the highest level since the late 1960s.

Consumer Sentiment

The final report for the Michigan SRC index of consumer sentiment showed only a slightly smaller rebound in  June than indicated in  the preliminary figures. As  before, the June index returned to about the middle of  the favorable range that has held since early 1994. In response to questions that constitute the aggregate index, respondents views on their current and future financial situations rebounded in June. Views on expected business conditions also improved. However, households' appraisals of  buying

conditions for large household appliances slipped again and stood at the lower end of  the range observed for the past two and a  half years.

Among the series that are not included in  the aggregate index, assessments of car buying conditions jumped to  the highest level in about a  year. However, respondents' appraisals of  buying conditions for homes deteriorated because of  less favorable views of  mortgage interest rates. Consumers' willingness to  use credit to finance major purchases rose to its highest reading since July 1994, but their willingness to use savings was little changed.

Inflation expectations moved back down in June after surging in May. The mean level of expected inflation over the next year retreated 3/4 percentage point to 4.2 percent, which is only a  bit above the average reading over the past year of  about 4  percent; the median edged down to 2.9 percent. Over the next five to ten years, expected mean inflation also fell back 3/4 percentage point to 4  percent, which is  just slightly below the average reading over the past year; the median was little changed at 3.1 percent.

Clarification of Change in  Federal Deficit Between Fiscal 1996 and 1997 (discussed on page I-3 of Part 1).

Although the staff expects capital gains realizations to continue at an elevated rate in  both 1996 and 1997, a  portion of  the fiscal 1996 receipts surprise is forecast to  be temporary because the strong financial market gains of 1995 were not anticipated by taxpayers and resulted in unusually high final payments in 1996. Continued strong withheld and estimated tax payments during the first half of this year suggest that taxpayers are incorporating the higher level of capital gains realizations into their current tax payments. As a  result, fiscal 1996 revenues are expected to reflect the tax consequences of  increased capital gains realized in both 1995 and 1996, whereas the fiscal 1997 revenue reflects, for the most part, only the higher level of gains for 1997.

Real Gross  Domestic  Product and Related  Items

(Percent  change  from  previous eriod  at  compound p annual rates;

based on seasonally djusted  data,  chain-type ndexes) a i

<!-- missing-text -->

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF  CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and buying conditions are the  percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the  percent reporting 'bad  times' (or 'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to  fall.

Selected  Financial arket Quotations' M

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Average  for  two-week  reserve  aintenance eriod losest  o  date  shown.  Last bservation  s m p c t o i average maintenance eriod  to ate uly  3, p d J 1996.

- 5 Most  recent  bservation sed  on one-day  Thursday  quote  and  futures  arket  index hanges. o ba m c

- 7. Quotes  for eek ending  Friday revious  o  date hown. w p t s

COMMERCIAL BANK CREDIT

(Percentage ange;  seasonally  djusted  nnual ate) ch a a r 1

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. ncludes  unicipal  ecurities, eign  overnment  securities, porate  onds, quities,  d  trading  ccount ssets. I m s for g cor b e an a a
- 3.  Excludes  interbank  oans. l
- 4.  Includes  stimates  f  consumer  loans hat  ave  been securitized    banks  and  are  still  tstanding. e o t h by ou
- 5. ncludes  oans o  nonbank  financial stitutions,  mers,  tate  nd  local  overnments, anks  abroad, oreign I l t in far s a g b f governments, nd  all thers  ot  elsewhere lassified. o  includes  ease inancing  eceivables. a o n c Als l f r