Prefatory Note

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the bestpreserved paper copies, scanning those copies, 1 and then making the scanned versions text-searchable. 2 Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some imperfections may remain.

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.

CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CLASS II - FOMC

January 30, 1998

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee

By the Staff Board of  Governors of the Federal Reserve System

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

<!-- missing-text -->

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Real Gross Domestic Product

Real GDP is estimated to  have increased at a  4.3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 1997, after having risen at a 3.1 percent annual pace in the third quarter. Final sales decelerated about a  percentage point in  the fourth quarter while the pace of inventory investment picked up. In  particular, nonfarm inventory investment was reported to  have been almost $50 billion last quarter, up from about $38 billion in  the third quarter.

The domestic components of final sales more than accounted for the slowdown in spending last quarter. Real consumer spending decelerated in  the fourth quarter, with purchases of durable goods registering a  substantially smaller increase than in  the prior quarter and with outlays for nondurables edging down. Following extraordinary gains in the second and third quarters, spending for producers' durable equipment declined in the fourth quarter; outlays for nonresidential structures also contracted. Government purchases rose modestly in  the fourth quarter; gains in defense and in  state and local spending were partly offset by  a  further decline in the federal nondefense category.

In contrast to the domestic components, the external sector boosted growth of  final sales last quarter. Real exports of goods and services are estimated to  have risen at an annual rate of 11.3 percent in the fourth quarter, with the rate of increase picking up for both agricultural and nonagricultural goods. At the same time, import growth dropped back to just 1.3 percent last quarter, held down by  a  decline in oil imports and modest increases in  other categories.

Elsewhere in  the accounts, personal income growth was quite strong last quarter, and the personal saving rate moved up  to 3.9 percent. Although corporate profits are not included in the advance report, the implicit profit share was 10.1 percent in  the fourth quarter.

The chain-weighted price index for GDP rose at a  1.5 percent annual rate in  the fourth quarter, about the same as the increase registered in  the previous quarter. Over the four quarters of last year, this index was up  just 1.8 percent, the smallest yearly increase since 1964.

Consumer Sentiment

According to the final report, the  Michigan SRC index of consumer confidence rose in January--almost reversing its December decline and putting it  back at  the top of  the extremely favorable range that has prevailed since early last year. The final level of the index in January was  more than 2-1/2 percentage points above the preliminary reading of  two  weeks ago. Households' views of  their current personal financial situation were little changed in  January. However, they were decidedly more optimistic about their future personal finances, owing possibly to lower expected inflation. According to the SRC, the fewest number of respondents in thirty years expected inflation to erode their living standards. In addition, consumers were more optimistic about future business conditions. Appraisals of  buying conditions for large household appliances also improved in January.

Among the questions not in  the overall index, the index of expected unemployment change fell back in  January following an unexpected surge in  December. Consumers' willingness to use credit was higher in  January, while their willingness to use savings was little changed.

The  mean of  expected inflation over the next twelve months dropped to a  historical low of  2.8 percent in  January, and the median declined to 2.3 percent. The mean of expected inflation over the next five to ten years fell 1/2 percentage point to 3.4 percent while the  median declined 1/4 percentage point to 2.9 percent.

Consumer confidence as  measured by  the Conference Board and Michigan surveys moved in opposite directions in  December and January. The Conference Board survey showed that consumer confidence rose sharply in  December and then fell back in  January. In  January, views on expected business and employment conditions as well as future income gains were decidedly more pessimistic--the opposite of the Michigan results. Nevertheless, despite the differences between the two indexes over the past two months, both surveys indicate that consumer confidence remains at the highly favorable level that prevailed in  the second half of last year.

Erratum

On page 3 of Part 1, the characterization of our projected federal budget was incorrect. Our economic projection leads us to expect that the federal budget will be about in  balance in fiscal years 1998 and 1999.

Real Gross  Domestic Product and  Related Items

(Percent  change from previous  period  at  compound annual rates;

based on seasonally  adjusted  data,  chain-type ndexes) i

<!-- missing-text -->

UNIVERSITY OF  MICHIGAN SURVEY RESEARCH CENTER: SURVEY OF  CONSUMER ATTITUDES (Not seasonally adjusted)

<!-- missing-text -->

- * --  Indicates the question is one of the five equally-weighted components of the index of sentiment.

Note: Figures on  financial, business, and  buying conditions are the  percent reporting 'good times' (or 'better') minus the percent reporting 'bad  times' (or  'worse'), plus 100. Expected change in unemployment is the fraction expecting unemployment to  rise minus the fraction expecting unemployment to  fall, plus 100.

THE FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Mutual Funds

The top panel of  the attached exhibit updates our information on  net sales of mutual funds, to include the final December totals released Friday by  the Investment Company Institute. As shown, December net sales of  bond funds slowed substantially from the extremely high levels of November, but remain at a  solid pace relative to previous months and quarters. Net sales of equity funds declined more modestly during December, with small net outflows continuing among international funds.

As shown in  the bottom panel, liquidity ratios for both equity and bond funds remained near their recent levels.

Net Sales of  Long-Term Mutual  Funds

(Billions   dollars  xcluding  reinvested istributions; rterly  nd annual  data  at  monthly rate) of e d qua a a

<!-- missing-text -->

1.  Includes recious  metals  funds  not  shown  elsewhere. p

Source.  Investment  Company Institute (ICI)

Liquidity  atios for  Domestic  Long-Term R Mutual  Funds

<!-- missing-text -->

Source.  Investment Company Institute.

Selected  Financial  arket Quotations' M

(Percent  xcept s  noted) e a

<!-- missing-text -->

<!-- missing-text -->

- 2. Average for wo-week reserve  aintenance eriod losest  o ate hown.  Last bservation  s he verage or aintenance eriod nding  January t m p c t d s o i t a f m p e 28,1998.

- 6.  Most recent  bservation sed  on one-day  Thursday  quote nd  futures  arket  index hanges. o ba a m c
- 7.  Merrill  ynch Master L II high-yield nd index  composite. bo
- 8.  Quotes  for eek ending  Friday revious  o  date hown. w p t s
- * Figures ited  re  as  of he lose n December 15,  1997. c a t c o